Youll see surprising aspects of how our brains work and see how you can beat the system to improve your own learning and thinking skills.
Programming is all about problem solving.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C HAPTER 1.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) A GAIN WITH THE P RAGMATIC ?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C ONSIDER THE C ONTEXT What Is Wetware?
This Is Your Brain The most important tool in software development is, of course, your own brain.
Learn Deliberately Now that weve gotten a good look at how the brain works, well start taking a more deliberate look at how to take advantage of the system, beginning with learning.
Well look at planning techniques, mind maps, a reading technique known as SQ3R, and the cognitive importance of teaching and writing.
Well take a look at what you need to create an efficient learning environment using feedback, fun, and failure; see the dangers of deadlines; and see how to gain experience virtually with mental grooving.
Instead, you experience fundamental differences in how you perceive the world, how you approach problem solving, and the mental models you form and use.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES Figure 2.2: Recipe for corn muffins.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES As with most people, I am a novice when it comes to doing my taxes.
See Personal Knowledge [Pol58].
Its actually easy to derail an expert Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D REYFUS AT W ORK : H ERDING R ACEHORSES AND R ACING S HEEP Unskilled and Unaware of It When you are not very skilled in some area, you are more likely to think youre actually pretty expert at it.
The hallmark of the expert is their use of intuition and the ability to recognize pat- Intuition and pattern terns in context.
This transition from the novices context-free rules to the experts context-dependent intuition is one of the most interesting parts of the Dreyfus model; so our goal, for most of the rest of this book, is to see how we might better harness intuition and get better at recognizing and applying patterns.12 2.4 Using the Dreyfus Model Effectively By the late 1970s or so, the nursing profession was in dire straits.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SING THE D REYFUS M ODEL E FFECTIVELY This largely remains the case in software development as well.
What you need for your own learning and personal growth will change over time.
Understanding the Dreyfus model and skills acquisition is a skill itself; learning to learn is subject to the Dreyfus model.
To embark on this path to expertise, well need to do the following:  Cultivate more intuition  Realize the increasing importance of context and of observing situational patterns  Better harness our own experience To see how to accomplish these goals, well start the next chapter by taking a closer look at how the brain works.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Y OUR D UAL -CPU M ODES Figure 3.1: This is your brain.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) Y OUR D UAL -CPU M ODES CPU #2, however, is very different.
You need both: R-mode is critical for intuition, problem solving, and creativity.
Well look at this in more depth in Section 8.2, Defocus to Focus, on page 225. in the next chapter.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L INEAR AND R ICH C HARACTERISTICS There is of course plenty to talk about with these two major modes of thinking and consciousness, R-mode and L-mode, and what they can do for you.
As described in The New Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain [Edw01].
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ISE OF THE R- MODE TIP 9 Learn by synthesis as well as by analysis.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R- MODE S EES F OREST ; L- MODE S EES T REES Consider the following figure:18 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Here we have an H character made up of individual I characters.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H OW D O Y OU G ET T HERE ?
Just thinking that your brain has more capacity for learning makes it so.
Think in it.
4.1 Turn Up the Sensory Input The simplest thing you can do to begin to involve more of your brain in problem solving and creativity is to activate more neural pathways than usual.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen STOP Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D RAW ON THE R IGHT S IDE Figure 4.1: Is this Your House?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D RAW ON THE R IGHT S IDE Figure 4.2: Draw this picture.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen STOP Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW Why does this work?
Thats the whole point of Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain.
When problem solving, learn to be comfortable with Get used to it.
Pair Programming An interesting way to get L-mode to work with R-mode is to use another person for the other mode.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW rodent.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW We use metaphors so much that were not even aware of many of them (as with windows, mice, and so on).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES Next Actions 2 Make more metaphors.
In fact, its entirely possible that your R-mode already has exactly the answer to the most important problem that youre working on right now.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES But, all is not lost.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES For each image that crosses your mind, do the following: 1.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES But there are many ways to write your thoughts down, and some are more effective for our purposes than others.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVESTING P ATTERNS You have to sort of defocus a bit.
The key to creativity and problem solving lies in finding different ways of looking at a problem.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I never set out to be weird.
But we really do have bugs in the way we think fundamental errors in how we process information, make decisions, and evaluate situations.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M EET Y OUR C OGNITIVE B IASES experience, worldview, focus, and so on.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M EET Y OUR C OGNITIVE B IASES Figure 5.2: Project knowledge over time which would become prominent?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M EET Y OUR C OGNITIVE B IASES Resist the pressure.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY it is clearly better to take a pragmatic approach, as an X-er.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E XPOSING H ARDWARE B UGS Next Actions 2 Take a personality test.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E XPOSING H ARDWARE B UGS A Heaven or a Hell As well see later in Section 7.6, Imagination Overrides Senses, on page 212, you can physically rewire your brain depending on the thoughts you think.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OW I D ON  T K NOW W HAT TO T HINK Remember back in the discussion on learning, when I said you want to create an R-mode to L-mode flow?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OW I D ON  T K NOW W HAT TO T HINK To help get a bigger picture perspective and test your understanding and mental How do you know?
In this chapter, were going to start off with a look at what learning is really all about, learn why its suddenly so important, and explore techniques to help you learn more deliberately.
Well also look at some issues of learning styles and personality that might have an effect as well.
We can accelerate your learning, but first we have to talk about what learning is.
In the rest of this chapter, well look at how to make learning more effective in the real world.
Time-Boxed This is perhaps the most important one.
Too often, most of us slip into a kind of default learning schedule: you might take some time to learn a new language when you have a free moment or to look at that new library in your spare time.
By being deliberate about your learning, by allocating appropriate time, and by using that time wisely, you can be much more efficient in your learning.
Because everyone is wired differently, some ways of learning will be more effective for you than Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE Y OUR P RIMARY L EARNING M ODE others, so you need to figure out the most efficient way for you to assimilate new information.
The important thing to recognize is that these differences mean that some ways of learning are more effective for you, and others less so.
They dont have to be expert in the topic but do need to be passionate about the topic and about learning it.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R EAD D ELIBERATELY WITH SQ3R The first helpful aspect of this technique is that it is deliberate.
You might think of it as test-driven learning.
Take a Writing is as important as look at Figure 6.5.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN BY T EACHING As I mentioned earlier (in Section 6.8, Visualize Insight with Mind Maps, on page 181), taking notes seems to be very important, even if you never read them again.
In this chapter, weve taken a good look at what learning is and what it is not.
But all this learning is only part of the equation; next we need to look at putting learning into action and see the best ways to gain experience.
That is, well take a look at some key aspects to real-world learning and then see what you need to create an efficient learning environment for yourself.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) P LAY IN O RDER TO L EARN own.
You need the support Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E MBED F AILING IN P RACTICE of a good learning environment so you can more easily gain and apply experience from both your failures and your successes.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN A BOUT THE I NNER G AME Next Actions 2 If your software project isnt set up with a safety net (version control, unit testing, and automation), you need to get that implemented right away.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) P RESSURE K ILLS C OGNITION And its not just about debugging.
No learning.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I MAGINATION O VERRIDES S ENSES Much of perception is based on prediction,15 and prediction is based on context and past experience, so much so that current, real-time input takes a backseat.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN I T LIKE AN E XPER T In this chapter, weve looked at the value of playing to facilitate learning and the importance of actively embedding failure as an essential part of practice.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) A good question is never answered.
In this part of the book, we are going to look at how to better manage your mind along these three axes:  Increasing focus and attention  Managing your knowledge  Optimizing your current context Attention is the act of focusing in on an area of interest.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen I NCREASE F OCUS AND A TTENTION Sometimes we use the words information and knowledge interchangeably, but they arent the same thing.
Think of it as the working set of information that you are dealing with at a given point in time.
Focus on now.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I NCREASE F OCUS AND A TTENTION training.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I NCREASE F OCUS AND A TTENTION In this style of meditation, all you have to do is pay attention to your breath.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D EFOCUS TO F OCUS Next Actions 2 Experiment with meditation on a regular basis.
Just as you want to go from R-mode to L-mode to productize learning, you want to work with knowledge in a more deliberate way.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE What are all these topics, and why are they all WrittenFunny?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE Figure 8.1: Displaying a wiki page You create a new page by first creating a link to it, using a WikiWord.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE Figure 8.3: Wiki notes For example, take a look at the screenshot in Figure 8.3.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) O PTIMIZE Y OUR C URRENT C ONTEXT A Problem of Organization You may have already experienced this problem with email: if you keep separate folders for various topics, what do you do with an email that cuts across the categories you use?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) K EEP A B IG E NOUGH C ONTEXT 8.6 Keep a Big Enough Context The more you can keep information in context, the better.
If you start trying to tackle at least these areas, you will be well on your way to managing your focus and taking control of your attention.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) W HAT TO D O T OMORROW M ORNING to believe that change is possible.
or how do you know?
2 Practice.
Thanks, Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008)
