And then, instead of going up and up and up, crime began to fall.
All she had wanted was an abortion.
But in Texas, as in all but a few states at that time, abortion was illegal.
By this time, of course, it was far too late for Ms. McCorvey/Roe to have her abortion.
They were the very women whose children, if born, would have been much more likely than average to become criminals.
But you also tell yourself that you never could have sold the house for $300,000 on your own.
But in a different case, an expert’s incentives may work against you.
But very often parents are late.
What to do?
They love to dream them up and enact them, study them and tinker with them.
What if the fine had been set at $100 instead of $3?
And didn’t.
And if so, how would she do it?
Schoolchildren, of course, have had incentive to cheat for as long as there have been tests.
She is also more likely to cheat after her incentives change.
a.
a.
a.
This was in 1962.
His economist friends thought he had lost his mind, but his wife supported him.
There are no good data.
With street crime, meanwhile, that is not the case.
And how can you measure something if you don’t know to whom it happened, or with what frequency, or in what magnitude?
and U.P.
Consider the case of a one-day-old car.
Or that you are so befuddled by the complexity of their operation that you wouldn’t know what to do with the information if you had it.
Aside from the fact that selling a house is typically the largest financial transaction in your life, and that you probably have scant experience in real estate, and that you may have an enormous emotional attachment to your house, there are at least two pressing fears: that you will sell the house for far less than it is worth and that you will not be able to sell it at all.
What about a “charming” and “spacious” house in a “great neighborhood!”?
If you like granite, you might like the house; but even if you don’t, “granite” certainly doesn’t connote a fixer-upper.
Or think about how you might present yourself if you were going on national television for the first time.
But do they?
That, at least, is what they wrote about themselves.
Seven percent of the men conceded that they were married, with a significant minority of these men reporting that they were “happily married.” But the fact that they were honest doesn’t mean they were rash.
Consider the police.
a.
They didn’t know what to make of Venkatesh.
He wasn’t black, wasn’t white.
He listened but then said he couldn’t answer the question because he wasn’t black.
They gave Venkatesh one of their beers, and then another and another.
(He was right.)
At the very top of his list was crime.
So how did the gang work?
“So, you know, you try to take care of them, but you know, you also have to show them you the boss.
It may not seem as though she should.
But it’s not.
He was paid well because so few people could do what he did.
It was clean, it was white, it was pretty.
As long as there have been cities, there have been gangs of one sort or another.
But with crack, there was real money to be made.
So was the gap between black children’s test scores and those of white children.
As late as 1964, a black infant was twice as likely to die as a white infant, often of a cause as basic as diarrhea or pneumonia.
And then there was the crime.
But it’s not.
And it did.
In 1991, there were 14 executions in the United States; in 2001, there were 66.
So if you just look at raw correlations between police and crime, you will find that when there are more police, there tends to be more crime.
One study found that more than 25 percent of the homicides in New York City in 1988 were crack-related.
It didn’t.
She may want a child badly but in a few years, not now.
One study has shown that the typical child who went unborn in the earliest years of legalized abortion would have been 50 percent more likely than average to live in poverty; he would have also been 60 percent more likely to grow up with just one parent.
One factor to look for would be a correlation between each state’s abortion rate and its crime rate.
However a person feels about abortion, a question is likely to come to mind: what are we to make of the trade-off of more abortion for less crime?
Meanwhile, there is 1 child killed by a gun for every 1 million-plus guns.
Aren’t they?
The first five years of life are the most important; no, the first three years; no, it’s all over by the first year.
Still, the question of how much parents matter is a good one.
Each switch represents a single category of the child’s data: his first-grade math score, his third-grade math score, his first-grade reading score, his third-grade reading score, his mother ’s education level, his father ’s income, the number of books in his home, the relative affluence of his neighborhood, and so on.
The ECLS data do show, for instance, that a child with a lot of books in his home tends to test higher than a child with no books.
After controlling for just a few variables—including the income and education level of the child’s parents and the mother ’s age at the birth of her first child—the gap between black and white children is virtually eliminated at the time the children enter school.
The data reveal that black children who perform poorly in school do so not because they are black but because a black child is more likely to come from a low-income, low-education household.
But one answer may lie in the fact that the school attended by the typical black child is not the same school attended by the typical white child, and the typical black child goes to a school that is simply…bad.
Can the same be said for parenting?
The child has many books in his home.
The child has many books in his home.
A woman who doesn’t have her first child until she is at least thirty is likely to see that child do well in school.
She is also likely to want a child more than a teenage mother wants a child.
What are we to make of this?
The child has many books in his home.
But this is not to say that parents don’t matter.
Most of the things that matter were decided long ago—who you are, whom you married, what kind of life you lead.
But it isn’t so much a matter of what you do as a parent; it’s who you are.
Even more remarkably, nearly 30 percent of the black girls are given a name that is unique among the names of every baby, white and black, born that year in California.
Consider Connor and Cody, Emily and Abigail.
So what are the “whitest” names and the “blackest” names?
Darryl So how does it matter if you have a very white name or a very black name?
People do this all the time, of course.
The data show that, on average, a person with a distinctively black name—whether it is a woman named Imani or a man named DeShawn—does have a worse life outcome than a woman named Molly or a man named Jake.
And that’s why, on average, a boy named Jake will tend to earn more money and get more education than a boy named DeShawn.
His name is an indicator—not a cause—of his outcome.
Just as a child with no books in his home isn’t likely to test well in school, a boy named DeShawn isn’t likely to do as well in life.
Brandi (12.17) If you or someone you love is named Cindy or Brenda and is over, say, forty, and feels that those names did not formerly connote a low-education family, you are right.
Lauren and Madison, two of the most popular “high-end” names from the 1990s, made the 2000 top ten list.
Amber and Heather, meanwhile, two of the overall most popular names from 1980, are now among the “low-end” names.
Amber and Heather started out as high-end names, as did Stephanie and Brittany.
The kind of families that were the first to call their daughters Amber or Heather and are now calling them Lauren or Madison.
The kind of families that used to name their sons Justin or Brandon and are now calling them Alexander or Benjamin.
The same could be surmised of most of the Hebrew names (Rotem and Zofia, Akiva and Zev), even though many of today’s most mainstream names (David, Jonathan, Samuel, Benjamin, Rachel, Hannah, Sarah, Rebecca) are of course Hebrew biblical names.
Annika Ansley Ava Avery Aviva Clementine Eleanora Ella Emma Fiona Flannery Grace Isabel Kate Lara Linden Maeve Marie-Claire Maya Philippa Phoebe Quinn Sophie Waverly Most Popular Boys’ Names of 2015?
Aidan Aldo Anderson Ansel Asher Beckett Bennett Carter Cooper Finnegan Harper Jackson Johan Keyon Liam Maximilian McGregor Oliver Reagan Sander Sumner Will Obviously, a variety of motives are at work when parents consider a name for their child.
But they are all trying to signal something with a name, whether the name is Winner or Loser, Madison or Amber, Shithead or Sander, DeShawn or Jake.
