Higher productivity, therefore, leads not only to longer working time for individual workers, but also to the employment of more workers.
(3) At given productivity of labor, and hence given demand for labor, production can expand only if the supply price of labor decreases.
The demand curve Db of producer Bruns to the right of the former demand curve D. THE STATIONARY ECONOMY We can now immediately see how many apples and pears A and B produce, if we assume that the production costs of apples and pears are the same <supply curve 8 1), and if we also assume that the original work-rest choice remains valid, i.e. that each works the number of work-hours that is required for the production of 50 apples.
It is most unlikely that production costs will be the same for two COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS or more producers.
But if the production costs of A and B differ, exchange will take place as soon as they are no longer isolated from each other but able to exchange goods.
Thus exchange increases the total output not only through increased productivity due to division of labor, but also through an increase in the amount of work done, due to its higher remuneration.
The workers deliver to the entrepreneurs not their products but their work, and it is the entrepreneurs who exchange the workers' work with nature.
The result will be that at the end of the production period the distribution of money among the entrepreneurs will be different from what it was at THE STATIONARY ECONOMY the beginning.
In a money economy, the money which the workers receive from their entrepreneurs in wages and spend for their living during any given production period does.
and the individual goods capital goods.
They own money and lend it to entrepreneurs, who use the money to pay their workerswho in turn use it to buy goods of a past production period.
9 When the entrepreneurs of the past period sell their products to the workers of the present period, the money they receive enables them to repay their loans and thus to free themselves from their debts to the capitalists.
But even if there are no new savings, employment and production can' increase.
Amount of Capital and Roundabout Ways of Production Increase in production is not the only thing which causes the quantity of goods simultaneously present in an economy, the capital of the economy, to increase.
When a worker changes over to machine production, a new COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS factor of production appears to have been introduced.
This is why production with more capital, with a strengthened-or, as is sometimes said, a deepened-capital structure, takes more time.
II Consumer goods THE STATIONAAY ECONOMY production detours, lead to increased production not by the employment of more workers but by an increase in the productivity of the single worker., Work spent on building and then on using a machine yields technically higher results than work applied immediately to the production of the end product.
When we speak of a stationary economy, we do not mean an economy in which production and consumption come to a stop.
During every production period all factors of production together consume what they produce, or rather what they have produced in the past production period.
Production creates income for the factors of production, and the spending of this income leads to consumption.
Thus more work will be done, and production will increase either when higher rewards are offered for work-for instance, when the productivity of labor has risen-or when the workers are prepared to accept lower wages.
But as soon as other factors contribute to production, the demand curve for labor (for reasons to be discussed later) will run down to the right, indicating that entrepreneurs are prepared to employ additional labor only at lower wages.
At the same time, as we shall see, the income accruing to other factors of production increases.
What, on the other hand, will be the shape and level of the demand curve for credits, i.e. how much capital will be demanded at the various interest rates?
productivity of the labor used in production.
So if the supply of capital increases, the interest rate must decline.
Capital will be saved and employed in production up to the point where the higher interest demanded for additional credits can no longer be paid by the entrepreneurs because the additional amounts of capital no longer increase productivity to a corresponding degree.
This part is by no means equivalent to the total amount by which production has increased owing to the use of capital.
They cannot be distinguished from the productivity of labor as such.
production into detours-leads to the production of goods.
Land is also necessary for every other production.
We shall consider only two factors of production: first labor, including land as a carrier of services, for which the entrepreneur has to pay a price; and second money capital or credit, for which he has to pay interest.
The answer is that machines can never cost more than their production costs, for their number can be increased at will by payment of these costs.
Its services are fixed and are not influenced either by production costs or rates of COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS interest.
Land Prices, Wages and Interest Rates We have so far examined what determines the value of the services of land and its price on the assumption that the number of workers and the amount of investable funds are given.
Now the demand for fixed capital is much more sensitive with respect to interest rates than is the demand for variable capital.
It is the combination of variable capital with certain existing capital goods rather than with fixed capital as such that is at stake.
of their fixed capital goods that are being consumed during the period.
But because his unit costs have risen by d s-d4 , his costs are now c-f-d4-1 and his profits are not a-g-h-d s but f-g-h-d 4  All this is valid not only for each individual entrepreneur but also when the general price level fluctuates, as in inflation or deflation, for the whole economy, Le.
For what goods, for how many of them and by whom, will this money be spent in the consumption exchange to which we now turn?
As a result, a certain price level will be reached at which the supply of goods and monetary demand balance.
The Purchase of Intermediate Goods The factors of production receiving money in the production exchange for their contributions to production spend this money in the consumption exchange for the goods of the past period in order to consume them and to survive during the current period.
On the other hand the purchase of intermediate goods belongs to the category of the production exchange inasmuch as the products of past labor are not consumed immediately but directed into the longer production detours, so that their consumption does not take place in the current period but together with that of the labor of the current period in a later period.
Equality of Production and Consumption The goods supplied during a production period for consumption or as intermediate and capital goods and the goods actually consumed or used as intermediate and capital goods are necessarily the same.
In a stationary economy an entrepreneur is certain of the demand for his products and of the resulting price conditions.
The demand for pears and their price may rise, those for apples fall.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY (4) Profits can be made only by individual entrepreneurs and not by the economy as a whole.
Capital is remunerated by interest payments in a stationary as well as in a changing world, at least so long as capital supply is not unlimited.
In doing so we have to bear in mind that we are dealing with an economy in equilibrium: the economy is not subject to changes-in COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS particular the demand for and supply of capital, and therefore the interest rate, are constant.
(2) There is .always a risk of future changes in the interest rate.
On the assumption of constant circulation of money, all the money paid out during a production period to the factors of production must be spent on the resulting products.
To the extent to which demand for consumer goods falls owing to saving there will be a rise in the demand for capital goods and intermediate goods on the part of entrepreneurs, who get as credits such amounts as have been saved.
In other words, there can be inflation and deflation of money.
This proves-as cannot be stressed too often-that Keynes' theory belongs to the realm of inflation and deflation and business cycle theory and not to that of a general theory.
Changes in Consumption If all the money earned by the factors of production is spent on consumption goods, total consumption remains constant.
Changes in consumption can also be due to changes in production costs and resulting changes in prices.
THE CHANGING ECONOMY Changes in Production In contrast to consumption, there can be changes in production not only of a qualitative but.
Given a certain productivity of, and the resulting demand for labor, and given a certain supply of capital, the volume of total production is a function of the supply of labor.
The Basic Law of Employment Given a certain demand for labor, the degree of employment is a function of the supply price of labor, of wage demands.
To make up for COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS the reduced working time entrepreneurs may employ new workers.
COMMONSENSE ECONOMICS In the first instance it will be seen that if the labor supply curve 8 moves downward to 8 1 , employment increases by abo The increase in employment causes an increase in the product, but this increase in the product is smaller than the one resulting from the preceding additions to employment because the new workers, as explained above, have a lower productivity.
The answer is this: employment of new workers not only leads to a fall in the marginal productivity of labor; it leads at the same time to an increase in the marginal productivity of capital, since the demand for capital per worker becomes more urgent.
This is an expression of the fact that capital no longer needed for the payment of the marginal workers and their equipment THE CHANGING ECONOMY with capital can now be used.
As a result, capitalists will receive higher interest, an expression of the fact that the productivity of capital has risen through the increase in labor employment.
Changes in the Demand for Labor We have so far examined the effects of changes in the supply of labor at a given demand for labor.
We shall now examine the effects of changes in the demand for labor.
A change in the productivity of labor is not identical with a change in the productivity of capital applied to labor, although this is assumed in most wage negotiations.
Since, at the same time, the productivity of the workers has.
This increase is smaller than would correspond to the increase in productivity because the wages of all workers are in accordance with the productivity of the marginal worker.
Changes in the Productivity of Capital As we have stated earlier, changes in the productivity of capital are not to be confused with changes in the productivity of labor.
In a free' competitive economy the workers can benefit, from an increase in the productivity of capital only when the supply of capital grows at the same rate as the demand for capital and when, therefore, interest rates do not change.
But even when interest rates do not go up, because capital supply has increased and entrepreneurs are therefore in a position to grant wage increases-even then higher wages must lead to temporary unemployment in some enterprises.
If the increase in total output is due to an increase in the productivity of labor, wages go up, but less than would correspond to the increase in productivity.
If more labor is combined with the same amount of capital, the marginal productivity of labor and the wage level decrease.
the marginal productivity of capital and the interest rate increase.
If the greater employment of labor is due to an increase in the productivity of labor, the wage level does not fall absolutely, but only in relation to the higher productivity.
Increase of capital results, of course, in higher productivity of the labor now used in more capitalistic production methods.
And as higher interest rates increase the sum available for future consumption, because the accumulation of interest at the future THE CHANGING ECONOMY date becomes greater, the propensity to save will, .other things being equal, increase as interest rates rise.
If interest rates rise,for instance, .because of higher demand for capital, more will be saved per unit of time.
When an individual's income increases, his savings rate will as a rule increase.
If, on the other hand, a whole community's income increases -and the only way this can happen in real terms is through increased work or increased productivity of labor-the total amount of saving generally grows, but the savings rates do not increase.
But as higher real incomes are chiefly the result of higher productivity through increased use of capital, such higher income.s will not change the relative strength of demand for and supply of capital.
The effects of changes in demand for capital on interest rates, however, are opposite to those resulting from changes in supply.
The effects of changes in supply of and demand for capital on the amounts of capital used and on interest rates are demonstrated in Figure 19.
We have already mentioned one of the reasons for increase and decrease in the demand for capital.
Changes "in Capital Supply and Demand Influence Demand for Labor We have described above how changes in the demand for and supply of labor give rise to induced changes in the demand for capital.
We have seen that when, for instance, the supply of or the demand for labor grows, the latter because of an increase in the productivity of labor, the demand for capital rises.
If the supply of or the demand for capital rises, the latter because the productivity .of capital has gone up, there is an induced demand for labor.
Should the supply of or the demand for capital fall, which is unlikely to happen in the long run, the result would be.a reduction in employment and a fall in wages.
It follows that in so far as the supply of capital is not completely inelastic, i.e. in so far as capitalists are unwilling to supply the same amounts of capital at lower interest rates, both corporation taxes and personal taxes are bound to have a restricting effect on the use of capital.
When the use of capital increases owing to cheaper or increased supply of capital this is self-evident, because in this case the interest rate falls.
When the use of capital increases owing to higher productivity \of, and hence higher demand for, capital the interest rate rises, but the compensation per unit of capital nevertheless decreases relatively to the compensation of labor because for a given labor force wages rise more than interest per unit of capital.
The amount saved per unit of capital, because of lower interest rates, accrues to COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS labor in the form of higher wages.
But the increase in the share of capital is smaller than the increase in the use of capital.
It will lead to increased production-and thus to increased real investment or real consumption-only under one of the two conditions: Either the labor supply curve must remain stable in spite of rising prices-for any length of time an entirely unrealistic assumption of Keynes who maintains that the supply of labor is not a function of real wages (General Theory, p. 8); or labor supply must be perfectly elastic for a certain time, as in the special situation of the recovery phase of the business cycle.
Deflationary Effect of Increased Employment Our analysis so far was implicitly based on the assumption that, so long as the circulation of money is inelastic, the general level of prices and wages is not subject to any changes.
It is now no longer spent by the consumer or entrepreneur himself for the products of the past period, but is in the first place used for wage payments.
Here an additional need for money arises from the increase in wages due to higher productivity of labor.
At a given circulation of money this increased need for money must again lead to a deflationary situation such as that described above.
In this connection, too, an increase of money is often demanded; the volume of money should be adjusted to the increase in the volume of 'goods due to the higher productivity.
3 Changes in Consumption and Investment do not Change Employment Unless changes in consumption and investment lead to inflation or deflation, they cannot have any influence on aggregate employment.
Employment never fluctuates if labor demands higher money wages when prices rise through inflation and is content with lower money wages when prices fall through deflation.
Here it suffices to state that as long as wage demands are fully adjusted to changes in the value of money inflation and deflation simply lead to, or are identical with, changes in the level of wages and prices but do not alter the employment level.
No price changes could happen any more between the present and the future.
In a certain sense the prices of the present always rest on errors.. far-reaching consequences for the structure of the economy as a whole, as well as for the profit and loss situation of individual entrepreneurs.
When savings increase, the demand for capital goods rises while the demand for consumption goods contracts.
In fact, however, entrepreneurs do not at once bid up the prices of the factors of production to the point where future price rises can no longer yield profits.
If interest rates decline owing to declining demand for or rising supply of capital, or if interest rates rise for the opposit~ reasons, this must have decisive effects on the prices of shares and bonds.
For earnings decline neither more nor less than the interest rates at which these earnings are capitalized.
If, on the other hand, capital invested in enterprises yields more than previouslY,for instance because the productivity of capital has increased, then the earnings of the companies will rise and so will the interest rate.
Therefore there will again be no changes in the prices for shares with variable dividend rates because the higher dividends are now capitalized at a higher interest rate.
Therefore, a fall in interest rates will raise the prices of shares with earnings coming largely from rents and monopoly profits, and a rise in interest rates will depress the prices of such shares.
The effects on share prices of such a reduction in demand for capital will, however, be somewhat different from those of declining demand for capital in general.
The effects on share prices of such.
Part III THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION T he Preconditions of Inflation and Deflation So far we have examined the working of an economy in which the volume of money and its velocity of circulation remain unchanged.
When, for instance, the interest rates on the credit markets are higher than the bank rate, individuals and banks will sell bills and bonds to the Central Banks.
He neverwent so far as to maintain that credit demand and credit supply balance only by chance without money deflation or inflation.
Effects of Inflation and Deflation on the Capital Structure The effects of inflationary credits are, in many respects, different from those of non-inflationary credits.
If, on the other hand, the additional credits are used for purposes of production-as they are in times of normal cyclical prosperity-all those effects will be created which have been described in Part II as the effects of increased use of capital.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Effects of Inflation and Deflation on Employment The effects of inflationary credits 'are not limited to lengthening production detours.
Since the additional supply of inflationary credits lowers interest rates not only more capital but also more labor can be used.
It is important to note that if-but only if-no changes in the supply price of factors of production, especially labor and capital, occur simultaneously with credit inflation the latter's effects on capital structure as well as on employment are lasting.
Obviously saving and investment are not equal in so far as they balance only if and when the banks have expanded or contracted their credits by inflation or deflation.
Inflation and Deflation and the General Price Level The increased purchasing power created by credit expansion never buys the goods produced in the same period.
The result is an increase in the prices of the products of the past period.
Entrepreneurs.
In the latter case the money increases the demand on the markets for consumption goods.
This is a Gorrect description of the effects of money and credit inflation of the current period (Period II) on the prices of goods produced in the past production period (Period I), in which inflation could not yet influence the volume of output.
The Demand for Products of the Current Production Period The effect of inflation on the prices of goods produced in the current production period (Period II) is much more complicated, because now not only the demand for, but also the supply of goods increases.
is obviously dependent on the amounts entrepreneurs will be prepared to spend on production in the next, the future, production period (Period III)-just as the demand for the goods produced in the past period (Period I) was dependent on the amounts entrepreneurs were prepared to spend in the current production period (Period II).
The demand for the goods produced in the present thus depends on how much entrepreneurs decide to spend in the future on capital goods, intermediate goods and wages.
But, on the average, the price expectations of entrepreneurs will be higher than at the time of the production decisions for Period II.
This, again, means that the demand for credits with which to pay for capital goods, intermediate goods and wages rises in Period III, just as in the.
The demand for the products of the current Period (II) during Period III will therefore be higher than the demand for the products of Period I during Period II.
In this case the additional credits will increase only the use of capital but no longer the employment of labor.
This does not mean, however, that the prices of capital goods taking time to construct must at the end of the current period rise far above their THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION production costs.
The immediate adjustment of the economy to inflation is also often prevent~d by the fact that the amount of fixed capital cannot be increased as quickly as the .amount of variable capital.
In this case-which corresponds somewhat to the case of changing payment habits-an increase of the quantity of money by inflationary credit expansion has no influence on the general price level since the quantity of money appearing on the markets for goods in a certain period is not increased.
75"""'77) that, given a certain capital, the effects of an increased labor supply are: increased production as a result .of increased employment, declining wages and increasing interest rates as a result of the distribu.. tion of the given .capital to equip an increased number of workers, and the consequent increased marginal productivity of capital.
This can, of course, be achieved by preventing the rise of the interest rates in spite of the increased demand for capital, i.e. by supplying the needed capital at the old rates by inflationary credit expansion.
This inflationary credit expansion, while supporting the price level, will, however, not raise it because the increased money circulation meets a supply of goods that has been increased through the higher productivity.
2 Those who consider an "inflation without inflation" to be harmless overlook the fact that productivity increases mean profit increases for the entrepreneurs as long as costs-for labor as well as for capital-are not fully raised accordingly.
It does not make any difference whether profits rise because prices rise or because costs decline by increase of productivity.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Cumulative Effect of the Original Inflation The second money inflation (in Period III) is caused, as we have seen, by the fact that the first inflation (in the current Period II) lifted the prices of goods produced in the past (Period I).
Entrepreneurs, experiencing for a protracted time that prices are higher at the end of each production period than they were at its beginning, will expect prices to rise again during the current period and will base their production decisions on these expectations.
Prices could no longer rise between the present and the future.
The entrepreneur receives a COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS greater amount of money for his products than he expected and than he spent on factors of production.
The result will, of course, be that prices go up more than if only the current and the pent-up demand had to be satisfied.
If the credit supply curve is S(n) and the demand curve D, supply and demand for credits balance at an interest rate of 5 per cent without the help of inflationary credits.
The same happens if the inflation is not due to greater or cheaper supply of credits by banks, but to a stronger demand THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION for credits.
If money.
The ensuing demand for carry-over credits may be so strong that interest rates rise in spite of higher credit supply from quasi-saving.
However, in times of inflation this happens-not because of the Keynesian psychological law, according to which an increase in the living standard leads to an increase in the savings rate, but because inflation leads to a redistribution of income in favor of higher, and at the expense of lower income groups.
They are determined by the productivity of capital and the interest rate.
If it is not elastic, entrepreneurs will have to produce the greater amount COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS of consumer goods in a less capitalistic way.
Foran economy which avoids inflation and deflation it remains true that more spending on investment leads not to more, but to less spending on consumption; and that more spending on consumption leads not to more, but to less spending on investment.
The demand curve for credits moves up, but so will the supply curve, and credits will not increase.
Employment and production will not increase, and inflation will spend itself entirely on higher prices and not on higher employment and production.
In general, wage increases lower the marginal productivity and yield of capital: They have, therefore, a deflationary effect -unless we assume that cost increases cause price increases.
For the increase in demand or prices must always be smaller than the increase in costs.
Even entrepreneurs and capitalistswhose income declines through the wage increases-had spent a part of what is now taken away from them.. Only if we assume that entrepreneurs pay higher wages immediately but curtail production only after some time could prices of or a demand for the products of the last period increase.
COMMON SE'NSE ECONOMICS Again, only if we assume, as is often done, that entrepreneurs would immediately lower wages but expand production only with substantial lags, could a deflationary effect on prices and demand for the products of the last period be expected.
All depends on what the entrepreneurs expect the effect of wage lowering to be on the demand and price situation-which again depends on whether they believe that production in further production periods, which produces the income to buy the products of the current period, will increase sufficiently so that the addition to total income will at least compensate the demand deficit resulting from the income shifts from the spenders to the savers.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION The End of Inflation Inflation stops when the Central Banks raise their discount rate to a level at which the inflation profits expected by entrepreneurs appear compensated by the higher cost of credit.
These windfall profits, however,are not necessarily profits COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS in real terms.
They follow from what has been said about inflation profits and loss~s, Share Prices in Inflation Share prices fluctuate around a level determined by dividends .on the one hand, and by interest rates on the other.
We shall return to this in Part V. Here we are concerned with the development of share prices in the long run.
Interest Rates and Share Prices If the inflation is due to a fall in discount and interest rates, the rates at which dividends and the interests on long-term bonds are capitalized are altered.
However, even if inflation is due to increased credit demand, and interest rates therefore do not fall, inflation influences stock prices decisively for the following reason.
Interest rates on the free market must, therefore, have a tendency to rise, bond and share prices to fall.
Should a demand for carry-over credits develop, interest rates will rise more in the first case, and decline less in the second.
Inflation and deflation result from changes in credit demand and supply, as described above in detail.
Why is the business cycle self-perpetuating?
The income of all factors of production is always sufficient-and is used-to buy all goods produced.
But more important: if additional capital is applied in an economy, the structure of the economy changes once and for all.
At the beginning of every new production period entrepreneurs spend the same, now increased, amount of money on capital goods.
If the Central Banks, and with their support also the commercial banks, fail to adjust their interest rates and keep them unnaturally low, the increased demand for credit will partly be satisfied by the banks' inflationary credit expansion.
It was an "easy money depression."
If this were not so, any increase in credit demand or supply, for instance, would lead to a single and lasting credit and monetary expansion, but not first to inflation and then, as a reaction, to deflation.
Recovery can, of course, also start from a combination of changes on the supply and the demand side for credits.
THE BUSINESS CYCLE The answer is given by what we have said above in connection with psychological business cycle theories.
The End of the Boom Recovery, as we have seen, can start from changes in demand for credits as well as in th~ supply of credits.
The supply of credits is curtailed when Central Banks raise COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS their discount rates.
Interest Rates during the Cycle Generally speaking interest rates tend to rise during the upswing and to fall during the downswing.
At the beginning of recovery interest rates rise less than would correspond to the increased demand for.
Free money market rates are, during the recovery phase, generally lower than the discount rates of Central Banks.
During prosperity capital market rates go up later than do money market rates.
During depression they fall later.
Business cycles with all their sweeping changes can thus also be defined as changes in credit demand or supply, to which at least a part of the population does not adjust-or does so only belatedly.
The result must .be .an increase in cyclical unemployment during depression.
Through the increase in COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS employment, and hence in output, during the early stages of the upswing, the price-raising effects of increased demand are at least partly compensated by an increased supply of goods.
The new workers' additional demand for consumption goods, and the new entrepreneurs' additional demand for capital goods, are at least partly satisfied by this supply.
As we have seen such profits and losses are due to three reasons: the increase (or decrease) of prices; the lag of production costs such as wages, interest rates and rents behind rising (or falling) prices; and the increase (or decrease) of real debts through inflation or deflation.
)~ COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS a cycle.
Securities during the Cycle Quite .generally speaking, common share prices depend on the one hand upon the dividends paid or expected, and on the other upon the prevailing yield of long-term bonds, i.e., the interest rates of the capital market.
money market rates, and-indirectly -upon discount rates.
Later, .long-term Prosperity Depression "" --~ \ "" \ ",, \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ .
Business activity and share prices remain low during the further course of depression, although interest rates soon decline and bond prices later begin to rise.
This is by no means self-evident.Theoretically, earnings on invested capital cannot exceed the interest rate at which new credits are demanded.
Share prices would, therefore, be bound to fluctuate with dividends, provided no changes in the long-term interest rate .influenced share prices from the money side.
In a bull market the yields decline because share prices rise more than dividends, so that the latter represent a smaller percentage of prices.
If, for instance, net earnings of a share are expected to be $10.00, and if the average price-earning ratio of the share has so far been 12 : 1, then the future average price of the share is believed to be $120.
T he Significance of the Past for the Future If share prices at a given time are identical with dividends capitalized at a certain yield rate, then stock market forecasts must obviously include prediction of future dividends as well as of future yield rates.
Dividends fluctuate not only within each business cycle, but also from one cycle to another.
stock market always discounts the future dividends and never the present.
It must be borne in mind, however, that if any future change is to lead to changes in the valuation of a share-or of all shares-it must be expected to be permanent.
On the other hand, Keynes has clearly stated in his General PRICE FORMATION ON STOCK MARKETS Theory that stock market prices are essentially the result of purely subjective anticipations.
Price Inflation What have been the effects on the price level of such a credit and money inflation?
Money Inflation With and Without Price Inflation Money inflation since 1949 which-taking into account the increase in the velocity of turnover-was in the magnitude of roughly 50 per cent, has undoubtedly been partly a money inflation with price inflation, the price level having risen by roughly 12 per cent.
But it has obviously been, too-repeating the phenomenon of the twenties-partly a money inflation without price inflation.
As far as this is the case, the higher monetary demand must have spent itself not on higher prices but on the larger product which indeed came to the markets as a result of the tremendous increase in productivity mentioned above.
They believe that at every level of monetary demand full employment can be maintained if only the supply prices of the factors of production are adjusted to the price level.
The new money increases the demand, prices and profits rise further.
What had set in was an employment depression without a money deflation or, better, no depression at all-at least not a cyclical one.
Nor is the increase of the demand sufficient: even a strong inflation does not produce an increase of employment if wages go up with prices.
The population is through the Keynesian economists educated in the belief that unemployment is always the result of a failing demand for labor and never the result of a too expensive supply, so that not the wages but the monetary policy must be responsible.
