This holds true for individuals, for communities and for the whole of humanity.
We have to understand it thoroughly in order to understand other forms of exchange which, though somewhat more complicated, are all based upon the same principle.
The answer is that each individual decides how many hours of leisure he is willing to sacrifice in order to satisfy his appetite for apples.
It is up to each individual to decide when the point has come at which the disutility of work is no longer compensated by the utility gained by more apples.
The famous law of diminishing marginal utility, or better, the law of diminishing v valuation of additional quantities of goods, comes into play.
On the one hand the need for apples becomes less pressing and is finally limited by the individual's consumption capacity.
The individual's valuation of leisure increases.
This means that our man will demand an increasing amount of apples for each additional work-hour; or, looking at it from another angle, his supply price of work in terms of apples will be higher for every additional hour.
I Our assumption that until the eighth hour the supply of labor -increases with the wage demanded is broadly in conformity with reality.
A higher wage level, and the resulting higher living standard of the workers, maycause a change in their value judgments.
The workers may prefer additional rest to ,additional consumption goods.
We then speak of the supply curve of labor moving upward or to the left.
On the other hand when the wage level, and with it the living standard, falls the workers may prefer to have more consumption goods rather than more rest.
The supply curve of labor then moves downward or to the right, indicating that more work is forthcoming at each of the various compensation levels.
History shows that the higher wages resulting from the increased productivity of the economy have been used by labor partly to increase leisure and partly to buy more goods.
How many hours will our man actually work on the assumption underlying our curve? }
The answer obviously depends upon the price, in terms of apples, which the demand for labor is prepared to pay.
In our simplified model it is nature herself who demands labor in exchange for apples.
We represent this demand situation in our graph in the usual way by a horizontalline at the wage level of ten apples an hour.
We immediately see that on the given assumptions our man will work five hours and produce fifty apples-not more and not lessbecause nature's offer of ten apples for an hour's work is exactly the compensation which our man demands for his fifth hour.
In other words his work stops at the so-called marginal work-hour where the price, at which its supply is offered, is still just covered by the price which the demand is prepared to pay.
Some Preliminary Consequences This is, of course, a very simplified model of what would happen in the real world even within an isolated economic unit.
Yet for all its simplicity it shows quite clearly certain THE STATIONARY ECONOMY v fundamental facts about the economic world which we will encounter again and again as we proceed to the examination of the more complicated real conditions: (1) Production never expands beyond the point where the worker demands more for his work-hour than he produces during this work-hour.
Any expansion of production depends upon the worker not demanding more in payment than he produces.
(2) At a given schedule of prices at which the worker offers various quantities of work-hours, that is at a given particular supply curve for labor, production can expand only if the productivity of labor increases.
Higher productivity of labor enables nature to pay greater compensation, in terms of product 'units.
If there are several workers it is now possible also to use work-hours of other workers, who had so far not been employed at all because even their first hour was too dear.
Higher productivity, therefore, leads not only to longer working time for individual workers, but also to the employment of more workers.
(3) At given productivity of labor, and hence given demand for labor, production can expand only if the supply price of labor decreases.
This will happen if the workers either value the utility of consumer goods ,more or the disutility of work less than they did in the~ past.
Individual workers' hitherto idle hours or hitherto idle workers will be drawn into the productive process.
(4) The over-production problem, one of the major problems COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS that has intrigued economists, does not exist in our simplified' Robinson Crusoe world.
So far as it occurs in reality, overproduction has its roots in conditions not present in the case of the isolated producer.
Here there can never be separate decisions on consumption and production.
Production and consumption are so closely linked that neither can ever exceed the other.
Jean-Baptiste Say's law, according to which any production creates a corresponding consumption, is unconditionally valid.
As soon as the utility of consumption goods no longer compensates for the disutility of the work of producing, production stops.
Our man receives a uniform compensation of ten apples for his work-hours, although it is only for the fifth hour that he demanded this compensation.
He demanded substantially less for the first, second, third and fourth hours.
This is his good fortune and results from the fact that nature, exercising demand for his labor, values one work-hour at ten apples.
It is a surplus arising when part of the output is withheld from other production factors for special reasons.
But this would be not because he had made a profit from his production but because he had saved or hoarded part of the output.
A Multitude of Products We have so far assumed that our man has the choice only between rest and producing a single product, apples.
We now take a small step away from the simplest model of economic life toward the.
In order to simplify the presentation,however, we shall assume that our individual has only the alternative of producing and consuming one more product, pears.
So far it was a choice between rest and work; now there is the additional choice between the production and consumption of several goods.
In analyzing the basic principles of this choice we are faced with one of the most important problems in economics-namely the problem of how mankind allocates available resources to various possible productions.
In our example our producer worked five hours to achieve a total production of fifty apples.
To what extent will he replace -the production and consumption of apples with those of pears, now that he has the choice between the two?
The answer depends on the one hand upon his valuation of the relative utilities of pears and apples, and on the other hand upon the relative production costs of apples and pears.
When the choice is between work and rest, the utility of the products of work is, as we have seen, valued exactly according to the law of diminishing marginal utility: the utility of additional apples appears less as their number increases.
For if we assume that our producer wishes to produce pears only by sacrificing some of the time hitherto employed in the production of apples, the latter become scarcer.
Weare assuming that the individuals are aware of this fact when making their production plans for a certain time period.
Anyone who is prepared to forgo apples if he can produce pears instead, demands from himself, as it were, pears in exchange for apples.
The valuation of pears' in relation to apples can, therefore, be represented by a demand curve in the usual way~' On the assumption just mentioned, this curve will have the shape pictured in Figure 2.
It has become usual in recent years to present the distribution of a given income (or effort) between two consumption (or production) possibilities with the help of so-called indifference curves.
to laymen than simple demand and supply curves, we have tried to do without it, especially as we believe that the introduction of the indifference curve technique does not involve any substantial change or progress.
Pears are, so to speak, supplied by nature when work previously devoted to the production of apples is transferred to the production of pears.
is, therefore, dependent upon the relative production costs of apples and pears-in other words upon how much more or less time it takes to produce pears rather than apples.
Our graph with its several supply curves shows how many apples and pears our man will produce, provided the assump- tions underlying the demand curve remain unchanged.
::~S1 t6 t-------i-------I----::~ Sa 2S Number of pears demanded FIG.
The position of the intersection points between the demand curve and the three supply curves immediately provides the answer to the question COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS of how many pears and apples will be produced on our various assumptions.
In the third case (represented by curve S3), where only one-third of an apple need be sacrificed for the production of each pear, 23 pears will be produced at a sacrifice of nearly 8 apples.
Differences in Utility Judgments We have so far been analyzing the behavior of a single producer or Robinson Crusoe.
If all made the same value judgments and produced goods at the same costs-meaning, in our simplified model, that each producer would be devoting the same number of hours of work to the production of the same goods as every other producerthen the output of all producers would have the same composition.
The curve D a (A's demand for pears in terms of apples) now runs to the left of curve D, the demand curve of our single producer.
The demand curve Db of producer Bruns to the right of the former demand curve D. THE STATIONARY ECONOMY We can now immediately see how many apples and pears A and B produce, if we assume that the production costs of apples and pears are the same <supply curve 8 1), and if we also assume that the original work-rest choice remains valid, i.e.
that each works the number of work-hours that is required for the production of 50 apples.
A now concentrates more on the production of apples, B more on the production of pears.
Even though the production costs of pears, in terms of apples, are the same for both, differences in taste have resulted in a different proportion of pears to apples in each of the two producers' total output.
It is most unlikely that production costs will be the same for two COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS or more producers.
But whatever the reasons, the fact remains that the cost of production of goods in terms of work-hours normally is different for different people.
Figure 2 has shown us what a single producer would produce and consume at various production cost levels, given a certain demand curve, i.e.
A may, for instance, be working under conditions represented by the supply curve S2 in Figure 2 (1 pear can be produced by sacrificing 3 apples), while B may be working under the conditions of supply curve S3 (1 pear can be produced by sacrificing t apple).
If the demand curve for A and B were that of our original single producer (D), producer A would now do as the single producer did when faced with supply conditions S2' i.e.
But the demand curves of A and B differ from those of our single producer; the demand curves now are as D a and Db in Figure 3.
To demonstrate what will happen, we have only to amalgamate Figures 2 and 3 in Figure 4, which shows: Producer A, with demand conditions D a and supply conditions S2, produces 5 pears.
Producer B, with demand conditions Db and supply conditions S3, produces 28 pears at a sacrifice of just over 9 apples, leaving him with nearly 41 apples.
B produces just over 7 pears for every 10 apples, the result of both greater liking for pears and greater proficiency in their production.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY Exchange of Goods So long as both A and B produce at the same cost, each sacrificing the same number of working hours for the same quantity of the same product, no exchange takes place between A and B no matter how different their individual relative valuations of apples and pears may be.
", 1/3 I-----r---------.Jo,~---~,-,-~o s 1S 2S 53(b) Number of pears demanded FIG.
4 follows the demand and consumption of the individual producers.
But if the production costs of A and B differ, exchange will take place as soon as they are no longer isolated from each other but able to exchange goods.
As an isolated producer, A could produce 5 pears only by exchanging 15 apples with nature, since his production costs for pears are those shown by curve.
It would obviously be advantageous for him to produce no pears at all but only apples, and to exchange some of the latter for pears with B, whose production costs for pears are those shown by curve Sa (1 pear for t apple).
So-called COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS division of labor would be the result.
What differs is the production cost of pears in terms of apples.
It is the difference in the relative production cost of apples and pears which makes exchange advantageous.
How could an exchange of products between A and B be made under the cost condition described?
If A gives less than 3 apples for each pear he receives, he gains by the exchange, for his production costs are such that he must sacrifice 3 apples for every"pear he produces.
The possibility of exchange with B, whose production cost of pears in terms of apple production time is lower, makes it advantageous'forA to obtain his 5 pears by exchange with B rather than to produce them himself.
Some effects of exchange become immediately evident: (1) Producer A now produces only apples and gets all his pears through exchange with B; division of labor is complete as far as he is concerned.
Producer B still produces 41 apples himself, even though his productivity is much greater for pears than for apples.
Owing to his lower average productivity A is too poor to buy more pears from B.
(2) The division of labor resulting from differences of productivity in turn increases differences and degree of productivity by specialization of production and work.
This,is due to the fact that each producer's own more expensive production has been replaced by the other's cheaper production.
In the same way international trade raises the living standard when expensive domestic production is replaced by less expensive foreign production.
More expensive production of all goods, on the other hand, does not lead to increased exchange of goods either in internal or in foreign trade, but merely causes a fall in the living standard.
The labor demand curve (cf.
Thus exchange increases the total output not only through increased productivity due to division of labor, but also through an increase in the amount of work done, due to its higher remuneration.
Exchange and Profits Exchange increases output through division of labor.
The term profit could now have two meanings: (a) it could mean a surplus accruing to the whole two-man community of producers, a profit for their national economy, so to speak; (b) it could also mean a surplus accruing to one of the producers by an altered distribution of output, a private advantage for one individual producer over the other.
The economy, as a whole, is nothing but the sum of all individual producers.
It does not make any difference whether the increase in output is due to greater productivity of individual producers or to exchange and division of labor.
But how about the increases in the income of the individual producer-consumers resulting from a changed distribution of output among them?
If an individual producer-consumer's share of the total product rises.
because his own output increases, this cannot be called a profit-at least not if we are to distinguish profits clearly from other forms of income earned by the' factors of production.
Profit is only that form of income which accrues to one individual because another individual fails to THE STATIONARY ECONOMY receive, in certain special circumstances, the entire output to which the "demand curve of nature" entitles him, according to his productivity.
But this only means that his output per unit of input, his productivity, has increased, even though only indirectly.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS In our isolated single-producer economic model, the worker exchanged his work-hours with nature against the proceeds of his work, the finished products.
In the case of a twoproducer economy these goods were then exchanged, at least partly, between the workers.
In the real world the workers generally do not exchange their services directly with nature or with other workers.
Our model of an economy of two producers becomes one of an economy of two workers and two entrepreneurs, as schematized in Figures 6a and 6b.
In Figure 6a the workers first exchange directly with nature.
In Figure 6b the entrepreneurs have also taken over the workers' exchange with nature.
The workers deliver to the entrepreneurs not their products but their work, and it is the entrepreneurs who exchange the workers' work with nature.
(Neither model is, as yet, complicated by the existence of money; we are still in a barter economy.)
(2) The entrepreneur is furthermore the beneficiary of production cost differentials.
We have assumed above (p. 12) that workers, for various reasons, produce with varying degrees of productivity.
In the real world the greater productivity of the work done is not generally due to some special quality of the worker, but of the enterprise in which he works.
It is therefore not the worker but the entrepreneur who reaps the benefits of the higher productivity.
Let Figure 7 represent the hourly output of two workers.
If it were the difference in the workers' THE STATIONARY ECONOMY efficiency which leads to the differential of 30 pears, the wage of worker A would have to be 50 pears, and that of worker B 80 pears.
But if not worker B but the enterprise B in which he works is responsible for the higher output per hour, the owner of this enterprise, entrepreneur B, has no reason to pay his workers more than they would produce and receive if th~y were working in an enterprise of lower productivity-say in enterprise A, where 50 pears are produced in an hour.
The surplus hourly production of 30 pears, represented in our graph by rectangle II, entrepreneurB will keep as a reward for the greater productivity of his enterprise.
All workers receive a uniform wage of 50 pears, regardless of the productivity of the enterprise by which they are employed.
(3) We have defined profits as income that accrues to some individuals because others do not receive the whole output of their work in special circumstances of a temporary nature.
income for himself the additional output of his workers which is due to the higher produc.. tivity, not of the workers but of his enterprise, is the profitmaker par excellence.
If entrepreneur A sees that entrepreneur B can produce pears at lower cost than he can, he will try-and in the long run he will generally succeed in the attempt-to imitate his competitor's methods of production.
Under the assumption of free competition A, as well as B, will begin to bid up wages so as to attract workers because any increase in production would enlarge their total profits.
The competition for workers will clearly go on until profits are swallowed up by wage increases.
This situation will change only if and when some entrepreneurs succeed in raising the productivity of their enterprises once more.
In a stationary economy, a theoretical model of an economy which goes on each day as it did before, by definition productivity does not change.
Money Entrepreneur A can obviously exchange his apples with entrepreneur B, who produces pears, only if he himself needs pears for himself or his workers.
Nowadays money, mainly paper money, serves as such a medium that is gladly taken by all members of the community in exchange for their products.
The chief function of money is to enlarge the number of people between whom exchanges can take place.
It enables anyone member of the community to dispose of his goods to any other member, regardless of whether the latter produces anything the first wants; the money received enables him to get the equivalent in goods he wants from a third person.
We have seen above (p. 14) how division of labor increases the productivity of the work done.
It follows that the introduction of money as an enlarger of exchange possibilities must result in increased division of labor and thus in higher output.
Since higher output as a rule THE STATIONARY ECONOMY increases the amount of hours worked, the introduction of money raises living standards in two ways.
Before the introduction of money apples wandered from entrepreneur A to entreEntrepreneur A Entrepreneur B ~~ ~o/ / >-,1 10;<),1.: ,c, ~'" " '\.
Worker B Worker A Circulation of money and products in a two-enterprise two-product economy FIG.
8 preneur B, who delivered them to his workers, while pears wandered from B to A, who delivered them to his workersfour exchange acts.
Now the workers no longer receive the finished goods from their own entrepreneur, who is eliminated as a middleman between them and other entrepreneurs.
With the money received from his entrepreneur each worker buys directly from other entrepreneurs-two exchange acts are eliminated.
Figure 8 shows, in very simplified form, the circulation of money in the case of apple production by worker A and pear production by worker B.
!I' COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS Besides being an enlarger of exchange possibilities and an exchange act saver, money has many other important functions.
In a money economy this is even more obvious than in a barter economy.
The same amount of money the entrepreneurs spend on the factors of production-the workers-comes back to them in exchange for their products.
Taken as a whole, money received can neither exceed nor be short of money spent-at least so long as the flow of money is not interrupted.
On the other hand, money is clearly the medium in which the private profits of individuals materialize.
per cent less for the production of the same number of pears.
The difference will show up as a stock of money not needed for the payment of wages and available for other expenditure.
This is the kind of profit we have discussed above; the entrepreneur pays his workers less than the full yield of their work because this yield would be smaller if they worked in another enterprise.
It can happen that an entrepreneur makes a profit not, so to speak, at the expense of his workers but at the expense of other entrepreneurs.
This can obviously not happen in the long run because no entrepreneur will continue spending money on production that he knows he will not get back.
But in the short run it might turn out, owing perhaps to a change in tastes, that the consumer-workers spend more money on apples and less on pears than anticipated.
The result will be that at the end of the production period the distribution of money among the entrepreneurs will be different from what it was at THE STATIONARY ECONOMY the beginning.
A's stock of money will have grown by the amount that B's has become smaller.
These show only the relative prosperity of individual economic subjects, i.e.
the extent to which the income and wealth of some entrepreneurs have changed in relation to those of others.
They give no information on the absolute, wealth of the community because they do not indicate what can be bought with the money amounts shown.
A scarcity of goods may lead to fancy prices and hence to higher incomes and capital appreciation for some entrepreneurs.
From this elementary technical fact it follows that the workers cannot consume the products of present labor, but only those of previous labor.
In a money economy, the money which the workers receive from their entrepreneurs in wages and spend for their living during any given production period does.
not buy the products of this same period but those of an earlier period.
And by the sale of these products of an earlier period the entrepreneurs receive back the money spent in that earlier period.
All this is unimportant in a stationary economy, where by definition outlays and production do not change from one period to another.
It would not be necessary to stress this point were it not for the fact that, under the influence of Keynes' General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, the tendency to use so-called circular analysis, which neglects the time element, has been strengthened.
Circular analysis presupposes that the current income of workers is spent on their current output.
This would mean that current production in turn is influenced by current spending.
But in reality current spending meets the products of past production which can no longer be influenced by current spending.
On the other hand, the fact that a changed demand meets an as yet unchanged supply does lead to price increases and declines and to many.
As production takes time, and we cannot therefore live from hand to mouth, a certain amount of goods in various stages of production must always be simultaneously present in the economy.
Goods ready for consumption are, in the first place, essential for production by enabling the workers to survive during the production period; the other goods, as we shall see later, are essential by enabling the workers to be more productive.
We shall call the total stock of these goods the capital of the community,.
and the individual goods capital goods.
The capital of the community is owned by people commonly called capitalists.
into the reasons for capital accumulation and changes in ownership.
In a money economy capitalists do not as a rule actually own the stock of capital goods.
They own money and lend it to entrepreneurs, who use the money to pay their workerswho in turn use it to buy goods of a past production period.
As production goes on, new, half finished and finished goods THE STATIONARY ECONOMY accumulate in the hands of the entrepreneurs.
Juridically these goods belong to the entrepreneurs, but economically they belong to the money capitalists because the money used for the production is owned by them.
The entrepreneurs are, as it were, the trustees of the money capitalists.
9 When the entrepreneurs of the past period sell their products to the workers of the present period, the money they receive enables them to repay their loans and thus to free themselves from their debts to the capitalists.
Figure 9 shows how the money borrowed by an entrepreneur in the current production period is used by his workers to buy the goods produced in a past period, thereby enabling past debts to be repaid.
Capital is needed to keep the workers alive during the production period.
We are therefore faced with the question: to what extent does any increase in employment actually depend upon an increase in capital?
Here we merely wish to make a brief remark on the so-called wage fund theory, which is the classics' answer to this question.
This theory assumed that more workers could only be employed if a store of means of subsistence had been accumulated previously by production and abstinence.
This problem-like so many others in economics-is not a real one.
The present lives as a rule on goods that flow uninterruptedly from past production into present consumption; stores of goods are neither necessary nor would they be sufficient to enable new workers to be employed.
Nor is an increase of production in the past a necessary condition for an increase of the labor force in the present.
What enables an increased labor force to be employed and production to expand is the fact that the entrepreneur obtains money with which to pay new workers.
This money may be borrowed from other people who have not consumed all the goods which they were entitled to receive, but have saved some of their income.
But even if there are no new savings, employment and production can' increase.
It is not at all necessary to think of such a thing as a fixed wage fund, as the wage fund theory in its monetary form supposes.
The necessary capital can be supplied through savings in other capital needs, or money can simply be created by money-issuing banks, as we shall see in Part III when discussing inflation.
Finally, increased employment may not require more capital at all if there is a proportionate fall in wages.
We shall discuss the supply of capital later in detail.
In whatever way the money with which to pay, new workers is made available, its expenditure for labor by.
the entrepreneurs enforces a redistribution of past products in such a way that the new workers can survive during the current production period.
We must sharply distinguish between the question: is the volume of production dependent upon capital accumulation; THE STATIONARY ECONOMY and the reverse question: is the amount of capital dependent on the volume of production?
If more is produced, other things being equal, there is an increase in the amount of capital, i.e.
in the amount of goods simultaneously present in the economy-or, better, of goods which reach the future from the!
Such an increase in capital is often spoken of as an, increase in the width of the capital structure-just as a river bed becomes wider when the inflow of water increases.
It is a useful comparison, and we shall use it to explain many problems in connection with capital.
Amount of Capital and Roundabout Ways of Production Increase in production is not the only thing which causes the quantity of goods simultaneously present in an economy, the capital of the economy, to increase.
Capital can also increase when production methods become more capitalistic, more roundabout.
In the same way, the goods simultaneously present in an economy must increase if production takes more time.
If production takes twice as long as before, the goods previously ready for consumption at the end of Period I will now not be consumed until the end of Period II, and will therefore still be present in the economy during Period II when a new production process has already started.
The classical roundabout method of production is production by machines: a worker no longer works by hand or with a few tools, but with the help of a machine.
When a worker changes over to machine production, a new COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS factor of production appears to have been introduced.
The labor incorporated in the machine differs, however, from the labor added in the current production period in that t,.
Short roundabout methods of production PERIOD I II.
PERIOD II PERIOD III Long roundabout methods of production _ _--11'-----____I I Ie Goods in production FIG.
10 it is work done long before the current period, and that its result is normally not consumed during the immediately following production period but in a later one.
On the average, the machine remains in the production process much longer.
It is consumed only over long periods.
During these periods the labor incorporated in the machines, together with the labor added in running the machines, goes over into the finished goods.
Even if the worker can thus produce more quickly with the help of the machine thari he could without it the entire production process lasts much longer.
It starts not with the current work of the worker using the machine but with THE STATIONARY ECONOMY the production of the machine itself, and it ends not with the goods completed currently with the help of the machine but with the last goods which the machine is still able to turn out.
This is why production with more capital, with a strengthened-or, as is sometimes said, a deepened-capital structure, takes more time.
How does an economy change from a less into a more capitalistic one; how does its capital structure deepen?
If all the money the entrepreneurs borrow is spent by their workers on consumer goods there is, on our assumptions about their replacement needs, obviously no possibility for entrepreneurs to buy machines.
But suppose the workers, or other factors of production who would in the ordinary course of events spend their income on consumption, decide to save and to put the savings at the disposal of the entrepreneurs: then the entrepreneurs would be able to buy capital goods with the money otherwise spent on consumption.
Once the economy has changed over to roundabout methods of production, no further additional saving is needed for their maintenance.
The capital structure is deepened once and for all.
For the finished goods into which the capital goods are ultimately converted are sold against money.
And with this money the entrepreneurs are again able to repay their debts to the capitalists, who can then lend it to them again without recourse to new savings.
Figure 11 shows this flow of money.
Needless to say, different goods require production detours of entirely different lengths.
The production detour of domestic help is very short.
building of houses and skyscrapers the production detour is very long.
But if the capital structure is deepened, every production detour lengthens, although not in the same proportion.
The new vacuum cleaner used by domestic help, too,means a longer production detour.
The deepening of the capital structure, the lengthening of PERIOD II PERIOD I PERIOD III Production of capital goods Worker (consumer) Capital goods , ..... ," .... ~ Production of consumer goods , L Capital goods Worker (consumer) " ..... ;: ..... , ;< ---- Consumer goods " "" ..... , -~ Worker ~:~sumer) Capital goods " ..... ... .... ~ .... A" ..... ..... ~ --~ I I ----to), / " ..... l Capital goods Capital goods " .... ----- Consumer goods .... "" .- "" .... ..... * ..... "" ..... ..... f --~ caPi:; goods Movement of money Movement of goods FIG.
II Consumer goods THE STATIONAAY ECONOMY production detours, lead to increased production not by the employment of more workers but by an increase in the productivity of the single worker., Work spent on building and then on using a machine yields technically higher results than work applied immediately to the production of the end product.
But the reason for this increased productivity is not that the services of a machine are essentially different from those of a worker.
If the machines really performed different work, if they were a different factor of production, it would be impossible for the price of machines to coincide in the long run, 'as it does, with their cost price.
The reason for the increased productivity is that the results of the work embedded ,in the'machine need be available for consumption only after a longer period, that production-or consumption-is allowed to take more time.
This Hbeing allowed to take more time" is really the second factor of production, capital-if labor is considered the first.
The entrepreneur who works with machines can repay the money he borrowed from capitalists for the purpose of production only after the amortization of the machines.
Per unit of product he thus needs more credits than before the extension of production detours (cf.
time -and not for the individual capital good~he has to pay a certain compensation calculated in percentage of the amount of the credits and according to their duration.
When we speak of a stationary economy, we do not mean an economy in which production and consumption come to a stop.
In a stationary economy production and consumption always repeat themselves in the same manner because there COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS are no forces at work which could change them.
But it is important to examine how such a .fictitious economy would work, so as to be better able to analyze the effects of changes in important data.
Production Exchange and Consumption Exchange We began our economic analysis with the examination of the extremely simplified model of an economy of one isolated worker-producer.
The worker supplied his work to nature against products and nature demanded his work for them.
We have since introduced three important features into this simple world: the entrepreneur, money and the time element.
It becomes a two-exchange economy. Here exchange for production and for consumption are separated into two acts.
The worker supplies his work no longer to nature for her products, but to the entrepreneur who demands the work against money.
In a second exchange, some time later, the entrepreneur supplies the finished product to the worker who demands it against money.
Both the workers and the entrepreneurs value money according to the utility of the goods and services it buys on the market at current prices.
The separation of the production exchange from the consumption exchange does not, however, change the fundamental fact that in a stationary economy production and consumption are always equal.
During every production period all factors of production together consume what they produce, or rather what they have produced in the past production period.
And during every period the factors of production produce what THE STATIONARY ECONOMY they consume, or rather what they are going to consume in the subsequent period.
The Fundamental Problems of Economics The fundamental problems with which economics is concerned can be summarized in two sets of questions.
In a capitalist and competitive economy production and consumption are dependent on each other.
Production creates income for the factors of production, and the spending of this income leads to consumption.
The size and distribution of income of individuals as well as of whole groups depend on the size of total production, on what each contributes to production, and on the remuneration for this contribution.
Consumption, in its turn, depends on the size and distribution of income from production.
Production again depends on consumption, because the consumer by his demand determines what is to be produced.
Production influences consumption, and consumption influences production.
Given certain supply schedules for the factors of production and certain demand schedules for finished products, the quantity and nature of the goods to be produced and consumed are perfectly determined.
A logical chain leads from production to consumption andback.
Since a beginning has to be made with some link of the chain, we shall for convenience sake begin by describing the production exchange.
We shall inquire first what and how much is produced, by whom and by what methods production is carried on, and how the factors of production are remunerated.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS Production Exchange: Production by Labor Alone If goods were produced by labor alone there would be no problems of capitalist methods of production or of income distribution among groups of different factors of production, particularly between labor and capitalists.
This problem depends, of course, on what the factors of production wish to consume, or better on how they wish to distribute their income on the purchase of various goods.
If labor were the only factor of production, work would be put into production up to the point where the money received for the work is no longer considered equivalent to the sacrifice of leisure.
Thus more work will be done, and production will increase either when higher rewards are offered for work-for instance, when the productivity of labor has risen-or when the workers are prepared to accept lower wages.
Here we shall but briefly anticipate: in a simple diagram like that of Figure 1 or 4 higher wage offers would mean an upward shift in the demand curve for labor, whereas willingness to work for less money would be expressed by a downward shift in the labor supply curve.
It will readily be seen that both movements would result in an increase of the volume of production.
the remuneration per work-hour, will -in case of a downward shift of the labor supply curveremain unchanged so long as the demand curve for labor is horizontal.
But as soon as other factors contribute to production, the demand curve for labor (for reasons to be discussed later) will run down to the right, indicating that entrepreneurs are prepared to employ additional labor only at lower wages.
At the same time, as we shall see, the income accruing to other factors of production increases.
The individual worker receives a smaller share of the community's whole cake.
But the whole cake has grown because .more bakers are at work, which in turn is due to the fact that the individual bakers are content with smaller slices of cake.
Weare thus led to the important conclusion that, given an unchanged demand situation, a reduction in the individual worker's share in the result of production is accompanied by an increase of the total product, whereas an increase in his share would entail a reduction of the total product-except under quite unrealistic assumptions concerning the' elasticity of demand for labor and the elasticity of supply of other production factors.
We shall see again and again the working of this peculiar law, according to which changes in the remuneration of one factor of production lead to opposite changes in the volume of the total product.
We shall eX,amine later on, in Part III, whether changes in wages can in certain special conditions influence the aggregate demand for goods, and whether, for instance, wage increases need not have the expected production-curtailing effects.
Notwithstanding the possibility of influencing the volume of production by influencing demand, the fundam,ental fact remains that wage increases curtail production.
This is a fact often overlooked nowadays by those who overrate the possible secondary effects of wage changes.
There is in a money economy a certain difficulty not existing in a pure barter economy: an increased product cannot be exchanged through the medium of the same amount of money unless the price level declines.
We shall, for the time being, evade this difficulty by assuming that enough new money is always introduced into the system to prevent a decline in the price level.
If labor becomes more modest in its COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS wage demands, .the wage level falls relative to the price level.
The difference between the amount of money spent on wages and the amount of money received from sales accrues to other factors of production as income.
Capital is another factor of production.
We have described above the nature and significance of capital.
Production can require more or less capital.
Even in the most primitive circumstances some capital is needed for the survival of the workers during the production period.
Modern production, with its very roundabout methods, needs much more capital.
As production detours lengthen-say double-a double amount of capital must be in the hands of entrepreneurs.
In a modern economy work is directed into roundabout methods of production by entrepreneurs, who borrow money in the form of credits from banks or in various forms from other money owners and spend that money on capital goods.
If entrepreneurs should wish to double the length of the production detours, they would need to borrow a double amount of investable funds.
The length of production detours depends, therefore, on the supply of and demand for investable funds.
Investable funds are directly or indirectly supplied by people who save money instead of spending it on consumption.
New savings are not necessary to uphold the status quo of production detours.
The money received from the sale of finished products enables the entrepreneurs always again to acquire the capital goods or semi-finished products they need.
The further question, how changes in income call forth changes in savings, will be treated later when dealing with the changing economy.
What, on the other hand, will be the shape and level of the demand curve for credits, i.e.
how much capital will be demanded at the various interest rates?
In other words, how much interest will the entrepreneurs be prepared to pay for various amounts of capital?
productivity of the labor used in production.
Suppose the length of detours of x years of a production in which y dollars are simultaneously invested is increased by 10 per cent of x years.
Suppose that by such an increase of length the annual product increases by an amount equivalent to the output of three workers.
Then, obviously, the entrepreneurs would be prepared to pay for the additional credit necessary an interest sum pro anno corresponding to the wages of three workers.
If the next extension of production detours would again increase the product by the same amount, the entrepreneurs would again be prepared to pay interest corresponding to the wages of three workers.
The demand curve would run horizontally.
For every additional new quantity of capital the same interest would be offered.
But in reality every additional quantity of capital is less valuable than the former.
Therefore the demand curve for credits does not run horizontally but downward to the right.
So if the supply of capital increases, the interest rate must decline.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS The Law of Diminishing Marginal Returns This is due to the so-called law of diminishing marginal returns, with which we have to get acquainted now.
It is concerned with the technical productivity of one factor of production used in combination with another.
capital-increases the productivity of the first factor, but in a decreasing degree.
The validity of this law will readily be understood if we consider that an amount of capital applied to labor, for instance in, the form of a hammer, is likely to raise the productivity of labor much more than the same amount of capital used for the last refinement of a capitalistic process.
This law of diminishing returns, or better diminishing marginal returns, means that the entrepreneurs will be able to pay less interest for every additional amount of capital.
We can now establish how much capital will be used in our stationary economy.
Just as on every other market, the quantities borrowed and lent on the credit markets are determined by the intersection point of the demand and the supply curves.
Capital will be saved and employed in production up to the point where the higher interest demanded for additional credits can no longer be paid by the entrepreneurs because the additional amounts of capital no longer increase productivity to a corresponding degree.
The lending price for capital, the interest rate, is determined by the marginal supply of and the marginal demand for credits.
It should be noted in this connection that the question of combination of capital and labor is not identical with the question of the optimum size of the plant.
Nor should either question be confused with the question of the optimum combination of so-called fixed and variable capital.
They do not exist in a stationary economy, where we must assume that adjustments to the optimum size of plants and to the optimum combination of .fixed and variable capital have already taken place.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY Production Factors are Remunerated according to their Marginal Utility It is sometimes said that the distribution of the proceeds of production takes place according to the contribution of the factors of production to the total product.
Labor receives what is to be imputed to labor; the capitalist receives what is to be imputed to capital.
In reality, the worker, equipped with a certain .amount of capital, produces a certain amount of goods -no doubt more than he would have produced without capital equipment.
But once labor is so equipped, it is impossible to find out how much of the product is to be imputed to labor and how much to capital.
The only thing which can be discovered is how much the product has increased by the addition of the last unit of capital.
We can calculate the so-called marginal productivity of capital.
The marginal productivity of capital determines not only the amount of capital used at a given supply of capital; it also determines what part of the total product is branched off and accrues to the capitalists in the form of interest payments.
This part is by no means equivalent to the total amount by which production has increased owing to the use of capital.
It is less because in accordance with the law of diminishing returns the marginal productivity of capital is less than its intra-marginal productivity.
The benefits of the intra-marginal productivity of capital accrue to the workers in the form of higher wages.
They cannot be distinguished from the productivity of labor as such.
to labor and capital there is allegedly a third factor of production-land.
The production factor labor is always used in conjunction with or on the production factor land.
Only the combination of labor and land-plus capital which draws.
production into detours-leads to the production of goods.
Land is also necessary for every other production.
The workers have to work somewhere.
Land was formerly defined as the eternal and indestructible basis of all production.
As a site for production and consumption land indeed renders eternal services.
As we shall presently see, the price of land is equal to the money value of these annuities, capitalized at the prevailing interest rate.
It is customary to speak of land and of the products of nature as a third factor of production besides labor and capital.
It is equally customary to assume that land and its services can generally be rented for "rent"-as capital is borrowed for interest.
Machines, too, are sometimes rented.
If we treat land in principle as being rented rather than bought, then we neglect in our analysis the fact that land has to be carried through time just as other capital goods, that it takes credits to do so and that, therefore, an entrepreneur buying land with borrowed moneythereby influences interest rates.
Entrepreneurs themselves make no distinction .
only between two totally different kinds of costs: on the one hand the annually recurring interest they pay for the money they borrow, and on the other hand the prices they pay, once only, for labor, capital goods or land bought with the borrowed money.
Machines are labor of previous production periods.
We shall thus treat land as a sort of capital good, provided by nature rather than by man.
We shall consider only two factors of production: first labor, including land as a carrier of services, for which the entrepreneur has to pay a price; and second money capital or credit, for which he has to pay interest.
Land, just as capital, is useful to the entrepreneur because it replaces work.
Given a certain area of land and certain amounts of labor, every addition of land for cultivation will increase the productivity of the existing workers and thus replace workers, just as every additional worker will increase the productivity of the existing land and thus replace land.
However, here too we meet the law of diminishing returns, as in the case of the productivity of capital discussed above (p. 40).
The productivity of a given number of workers cultivating land of a given quality will increase with the addition of more and more acres, though in a decreasing degree.
Entrepreneurs will obviously be prepared to bid for the service of every additional unit of land an amount as high as the wages of the workers that the addition of this unit can replace.
Given a certain supply curve of land services the price of the service is herewith determined.
Land serves not only production but consumption too.
T he Price of Land In the real world entrepreneurs do not buy the services of land as they do the services of workers.
The rent for a certain period, say one year, is equal to the value of all the services the land renders during the year.
One would expect the price of land to be equivalent to the sum of the prices of all the services it renders.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY In so far as the services of land are perpetual, the price of land would obviously have to be infinitely high, were it not for the fact that the purchase price is paid in money and that money if lent as credit also yields a perpetual service, namely the interest the lender goes on receiving.
Thus the price of land must stabilize at the point where the interest on the purchase price is equal to the price of the service the land renders during a certain period.
In other words the price of land is, in principle, the price of its service capitalized at the long-term interest rate for credits.
One has to compare the present utility of the money on the one hand and that of the annual services of the land on the other.
The money is, of course, worth its face value.
Since present money yields interest as of today, whereas the annuities yield interest only as of their payment, the annuities can only be valued at a so~called discount.
It may be asked: why is the price of land equal to the capitalization of the services it yields, whereas machines sell at production cost?
The answer is that machines can never cost more than their production costs, for their number can be increased at will by payment of these costs.
Nor can the productivity advantages of a machine ever be greater than the interest on the cost price calculated for the lifetime of the machine.
Its services are fixed and are not influenced either by production costs or rates of COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS interest.
But since in the long run money lent as credit and money invested in land must offer the same yield, the price of land must stabilize at a level where the interest on the purchase price equals the price of the services.
Changes in the interest rate must, therefore, entail inverse changes in the price of land.
A falling interest rate raises land prices and vice versa.
One of the chief qualitative differences of land rendering comparable services in other respects is the result of differences in distance from production and consumption centers.
Suppose the last additional unit of what we could call standard land, cultivated by 1,000 workers, increases the productivity of those thousand workers by the product of five workers.
There may exist other land of which the last unit, added to an equal area, increases the productivity of the same number of workers by the product of three, two or one worker.
Except for this last-mentioned case, entrepreneurs will be prepared to pay money for all land, but obviously less than for standard land.
Land of which additional quantities add nothing to the productivity of a given number of workers is worthless and generally free, Le.
They are the difference between what is paid to a worker of high and to a worker of low or zero productivity.
But the differential rent theory does not explain the laws according to which land of a given quality cultivated by a given number of THE STATIONARY ECONOMY workers is to be valued.
Nor does this theory explain the point at which land becomes marginal.
Differential rents and differential prices caused by quality differences should not be confused with the rents and prices of homogeneous land of a. certain quality worked by a given number of workers.
Homogeneous land of a certain quality yields its owner a revenue which corresponds to the additional productivity of the last unit of such land taken into use.
The benefit of the higher productivity of preceding units accrues to the workers in the form of wages.
Land of inferior quality yields less revenue according to its lower productivity.
With correspondingly higher demand inferior or more distant land is taken into use.
Land Prices, Wages and Interest Rates We have so far examined what determines the value of the services of land and its price on the assumption that the number of workers and the amount of investable funds are given.
We shall examine the effects of changes in the supply of and the.
demand for capitaland labor later on.
the wage demands, declines, more workers can be employed, as explained earlier.
The productivity, Le.
If the supply price of capital, Le.
interest, declines, the cost of production declines.
But the cost reductions vary according to the length of the production detours.
With short production detours costs decline to a lesser degree than they do with long production detours, because capital costs enter into the former less than into the latter.
Now the use of land means a long, in fact an infinitely long, production detour.
If somebody borrows money to buy land, he has to pay interest on this money in eternity in order to profit from the land's equally eternal and not amortizable benefits.
For this reason a lowering of interest rates must mean a very substantial reduction in the cost of the use of land.
This land will now yield a revenue even though its technical productivity has not risen.
All land prices will go up until the-now lower-interest on the-now higher-prices is again equal to the rent.
Variable and Fixed Capital We have already mentioned that the production detours made possible through the use of capital are of different lengths.
Labor used for the construction of a machine and labor used in working a machine represent the most important examples of such differences in length.
In the former case the product of labor is fully consumed only when the machine is worn out; in the latter case labor-including work for the production of raw materials fed to the machine-is as a rule consumed not long after input.
Capital which cannot be consumed or converted to other uses until after protracted time periods, such as machines, industrial plants and so on, is called fixed capital.
Capital such as that embodied in the consumption fund for workers or in raw materials, which can quickly be consumed or easily be switched into other forms of capital, is called variable capital.
There is, however, no sharp borderline between the two kinds of capital.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY It is often contended that fixed and variable capital have to be combined in a certain way for technical reasons.
It is assumed that a certain number of workers, a certain amount of raw material, and a certain amount of capital equipment must be combined if optimum results are to be achieved.
On the one hand, there is the problem of the combination of variable and fixed capital generally, and, on the other, the combination of variable and fixed capital frozen into certain forms.
In other words the amount of fixed capital is never determined a priori.
The use of fixed capital is determined by the same laws as is the use of capital in general.
It is applied up to the point where the cost of additional fixed capital is still matched by a corresponding increase in productivity.
Now the demand for fixed capital is much more sensitive with respect to interest rates than is the demand for variable capital.
It is, therefore, the height of the interest rate which, at a given marginal productivity of fixed and variable capital, determines the way in which both are combined.
The second problem, that of the ~ptimum combination of variable and fixed capital frozen into certain forms, is a short- run problem which does not arise in a stationary economy, where by definition the .length of production detours does not alter any more, and where, therefore, it is immaterial whether capital is frozen into certain forms or not.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS The second problem is not concerned with the question whether workers should, for instance, work with hand tools or at one huge steam hammer.
It is concerned with the question of what happens when there is a change in the combination of variable and fixed capital once the steam hammer is installed -for instance if workers are dismissed or new workers taken on.
It is the combination of variable capital with certain existing capital goods rather than with fixed capital as such that is at stake.
Suppose employment is curtailed because wages have gone up or prices gone down, as the latter do in depressions.
Then the entrepreneur uses less variable capital.
But the use of fixed capital frozen into certain capital goods like machines, plants, etc., cannot be undone retroactively.
The fixed capital and the charges payable on it remain the same even when the entrepreneur has curtailed his use of variable capital.
This leads, indeed, to combinations of variable and fixed capital which cannot be optimal.
In the long run, however, there cannot be other than optimum combinations between variable and fixed capital; they are determined by the productivity of fixed capital and of variable capital respectively and by the interest rate.
The Size of the Firm Not to be confused with the problem of the best combination of variable and fixed capital is the problem of the optimum size of the firm, that is of how many units of combinations of fixed and variable capital should be joined together physically and / or financially in one place or under one management.
In theory the answer is easy.
Entrepreneurs continue to produce in the existing plant, rather than close down factories or build new ones.
Even if entrepreneurs manage in such cases to combine fixed and variable capital in the optimum way, they will still be faced with the difficulty that the single firm may have become too large or too small.
Unit Costs and Marginal Costs The use of fixed and variable capital involves certain expenditures.
During a production period-or as we may assume at its beginning-entrepreneurs spend money on variable capital goods, particularly raw materials and labor.
These expenditures, which include also interest payments to the capitalists who lend the money so used, are called variable costs of production.
Entrepreneurs furthermore have to spend money for those parts.
of their fixed capital goods that are being consumed during the period.
(The main part of the fixed capital is carried over into the next production period as the capital stock.)
These expenditures, which include also the interest payments on fixed capital, are called fixed " costs.
Variable and fixed costs together are called total costs of production.
The combination of fixed and variable costs is, of course, a function of the combination of fixed and variable capital.
This means that in the long run there is no special problem of optimum combination of variable and fixed costs.
In the short run there is such a problem: variable capital declines or increases-with declining or ipcreasing output-whereas the fixed capital frozen in certain capital goods remains the same.
Therefore variable costs fluctuate, whereas fixed costs remain more or less stable.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS If less is produced than anticipated when the fixed capital goods were installed, the entrepreneurs will have more machinery, land, etc., in hand than they need for the smaller output.
As they have to be distributed over a smaller production, unit costs increase.
If more is produced than anticipated variable costs risefor instance because work can be organized rationally only in a factory which has been appropriately enlarged.
Unit costs will thus be lowest when production is exactly of the size which long-run plans anticipated it to be.
When production is smaller the stability of fixed costs, when it is larger the .
increase in variable costs, will tend to give an uplift to unit costs.
All this is treated very elaborately, too elaborately perhaps, in the usual textbooks on economics.
Assuming that this is the output for which the plant has beenplanned, this will be the point of optimum combination of variable and fixed capital.
Unit costs will be lowest at this point and will coincide with marginal costs.
P3 1S Price h +-1 Marginal costs Unit costs I I " f d4/ I Price Costs in dollars I a d3 I J I I I , Price S d I I I , I P21 e I I I I I I I f C C 'k I r i 5.000 10.000 I I I ,, , , / I I I I I II 15\.000 Output in units FiG.
12 What will be the effect on the entrepreneur's profit and loss of these changes in output?
His revenue, as his costs (price and unit costs multiplied by production), correspond to the area a-b-i-e.
For if the variable costs are no longer covered by the revenue, production will be stopped.
If the market price rises to $15 and the production to 15,000 units, the revenue of the entrepreneur rises to c-g-h-l.
But because his unit costs have risen by d s-d4 , his costs are now c-f-d4-1 and his profits are not a-g-h-d s but f-g-h-d 4  All this is valid not only for each individual entrepreneur but also when the general price level fluctuates, as in inflation or deflation, for the whole economy, Le.
The Consumption Exchange We have so far examined the production exchange, by which the factors of production supply their contributions to production in exchange for money as a sort of general representative of goods.
For what goods, for how many of them and by whom, will this money be spent in the consumption exchange to which we now turn?
The first thing to note is that, provided there is no interruption in the flow of money, all t4e money present in the economy must be spent on all the products coming to the markets.
All the money buys all the goods.
As a result, a certain price level will be reached at which the supply of goods and monetary demand balance.
This is the starting point of the famous so-called quantity theory of money, which deals with the relation between the quantity of circulating money and the price level.
But what products will be demanded and by whom?
The quantity theory does.
What goods are demanded for consumption depends essentially on the distribution of income.
A wealthy capitalist will generally wish to consume other goods than a low-salaried employee.
The distribution of income in turn is dependent upon the contribution to production of each of the production factors THE STATIONARY ECONOMY and upon their remuneration.
In the long run consumption follows production just as production follows consumption.
Since the distribution of income is of paramount importance for consumption demand, we shall briefly recapitulate the following points.
(1) Labor is rewarded for its contribution to production by the payment of wages on the part of entrepreneurs.
(2) The capitalists, who lend entrepreneurs money for wage payments and the purchase of capital goods, are rewarded by the payment of interest.
(3)' The share of the total product which the capitalists receive is determined by the marginal'productivity of capital.
For each unit of capital they receive a reward corresponding to the productivity increase due to the last unit of capital added.
This reward is smaller than would correspond to the productivity increase due to intra-marginal units of capital.
It is assumed that land is bought in the same manner as capital goods and that its contribution to production is, therefore, rewarded by the interest paid to the capitalists who have lent the money for the purchase.
To assume that the landowner receives a rent would be tantamount to counting twice the reward for the use of land.
The landowner gets his reward in his capacity of capitalist.
He lends the money which he receives for the sale of the land.
The Purchase of Intermediate Goods The factors of production receiving money in the production exchange for their contributions to production spend this money in the consumption exchange for the goods of the past period in order to consume them and to survive during the current period.
As we explained in connection with roundabout methods of production, entrepreneurs buy not only labor of the COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS current period (using the machines) but also labor of past periods (building the machines).
The purchase of intermediate goods is again mentioned here because in a certain way it, too, belongs to the consumption exchange category and occupies an intermediary position between production exchange and consumption exchange.
And again the receipts from the sales enable the sellers to continue production in a new period.
On the other hand the purchase of intermediate goods belongs to the category of the production exchange inasmuch as the products of past labor are not consumed immediately but directed into the longer production detours, so that their consumption does not take place in the current period but together with that of the labor of the current period in a later period.
Equality of Production and Consumption The goods supplied during a production period for consumption or as intermediate and capital goods and the goods actually consumed or used as intermediate and capital goods are necessarily the same.
But how about comparisons between the money spent for production -the money costs of firms-and the money receiv~d for .
products-the money revenue of firms?
The statement that THE STATIONARY ECONOMY money costs equal money revenue is, as such, not at all nonsensical, for sums of money can be compared with each other.
Clearly, in a stationary economy all the money spent must be recovered as revenue.
It implies that the money spent by an entrepreneur on factors of production and the money received by him for products must balance in the .long run.
For a deficit would restrict, and a surplus would expand, the production of any entrepreneur until costs and revenues again balance.
But each entrepreneur's contributiqn to the total production expenditure of an economy can be compared with his share in the total product.
Since, in an economy in equilibrium, entrepreneurs' monetary receipts exactly match their expenditure, each individual entrepreneur's percentage share of total input equals his percentage share of total output.
For the money paid by each entrepreneur to the factors of production represents a certain percentage of the total money stock of the economy and thus attracts the same percentage of productive forces into his enterprise.
'The money received, too, represents the same percentage of the money stock.
In a stationary economy an entrepreneur is certain of the demand for his products and of the resulting price conditions.
But in a changing world he might make mistakes because the future is uncertain.
The demand for pears and their price may rise, those for apples fall.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS T he Profits of Entrepreneurs We are now in a position to add some precision to our earlier remarks about entrepreneurial profits.
(1) Profits in the sense we use the word-in accordance with the definition of Schumpeter and Knight but contrary to the business man's notion-does not include the return on the capital used and the compensation for managerial services.
The firm which makes a profit will expand, that making a loss will restrict production until prices and costs again reach balance through the changed supply position.
Technical progress is one of the chief reasons for declining costs.
The dynamic entrepreneur who is the first to make use of new inventions or of new methods of production makes profits.
All entrepreneurs are then able, and through competition among themselves forced, to pay higher prices for the factors of production: profits disappear.
If, however, the new invention or method of production is protected against imitation by patents or secrecy, the profits remain-they become "frozen".
Monopoly profits, too, are essentially such frozen profits.
The entrepreneur reaps a profit not because he has taken a risk but because he has been correct in hisanticipations.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY (4) Profits can be made only by individual entrepreneurs and not by the economy as a whole.
If the total amount of purchasing power in the hands of the population is limited, the prices of certain products can rise only if those of others fall.
From the point of view of the whole economy, cost savings represent increased productivity of the factors of production, particularly labor, but not profits.
Thus a sharp distinction must be made between the resulting stationary benefits and the temporary profits made by individual entrepreneurs who deprive the production factors of the benefits of the productivity increase and keep these profits for themselves.. Profits are interpersonal shifts of income; they are private in character and do not concern the national economy as such.
(5) The so-called losses of the national economy through misdirection of production or through faulty investments are not losses of the national economy either.
What the misdirection of production has accomplished is only that the final distribution of the total product of the economy does not coincide with the initial distribution of wealth.
The owners of the hotel have lost to others their claim to the products of a certain amount of work because they overestimated the demand for the product of their investment.
But in such cases other entrepreneurs will usually acquire the assets cheaply through forced sale.
(6) This economic misdirection by misjudgment of demand has to be distinguished from what could be called technical misdirection.
If an entrepreneur uses methods which are inferior to those that can be used or are being used by others, the productivity of the whole economy is affected.
A lowered productivity of an economy which results in a lower aggregate output is, however, not a loss in the sense of the counterpart of a profit as defined.
Profits, Interests, Rents Profits and interests should always be sharply distinguished from each other.
Capital is remunerated by interest payments in a stationary as well as in a changing world, at least so long as capital supply is not unlimited.
What is meant by rents in the first place is the additional income accruing to certain entrepreneurs due to inventions or production methods protected by law, or due to a monopolistic position.
Frequently rents are also understood to mean all the monetary receipts or advantages of a more or less durable character which accrue to the owners of certain property, such as land (ground rent) or claims and titles (annuities, perpetual rents from non-redeemable securities, etc.).
Rent in this sense is normally the money paid for the use of land, houses, certain machines, patents, or other carriers of services.
This money is paid to the owners of these carriers by people who need .the services for production or consumption, but who are not willing or able to buy the carriers.
The rent paid for the use of land is, in principle, always THE STATIONARY ECONOMY equal to the value of the services of the land.
The rents for land and for all goods which are not freely reproducible lead, as it were, a separate existence of their own; they are independent of the rate of interest and of any production costs.
If the rent falls below the interest, the production of machines falls.
If interest rates fall, machines requiring a higher capital outlay can be taken into use.
The productivity of those machines is greater, but the marginal productivity of the capital incorporated in them is smaller.
The owners of the old machines save less labor per unit of output than do those of the new machines, yet they have to compete with the latter for labor.
For the buyer of the old machines can compete with the owners of new machines only if his higher production costs are matched by.a saving.of interest on his purchase price.
In doing so we have to bear in mind that we are dealing with an economy in equilibrium: the economy is not subject to changes-in COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS particular the demand for and supply of capital, and therefore the interest rate, are constant.
The future is like the present, and the present of course is known to all.
For short-term credits the above statement is obvious.
Capital is made available to entrepreneurs mainly against common shares, preferred shares or bonds.
Such capital does not become due for repayment for long periods, or indeed at all.
Dividends would equal interest on the issue price at the prevailing interest rate.
Entrepreneurs would be able and willing to pay in dividends on the shares exactly as much as they would have had to pay in interest for a loan equalling the issue price of the shares.
For preferred shares bearing fixed dividends and for fixedinterest bonds the proposition is even more obvious.
They would always be worth par provided the preferred dividends and interests are fixed in accordance with the prevailing interest rate, as they must be in a riskless economy in equilibrium.
their interest payments as a percentage of their price, are always equal to the interest rate paid for credits, is important for the understanding of the price formation of securities.
(2) There is .always a risk of future changes in the interest rate.
fear that it will fall, then the price of long-term investments will be above par and their yield below the prevailing short-term interest rate.
On the other hand, the price of long-term investments may be lower than par and their yield above the prevailing short-term interest rate if people are "bullish" regarding the interest rate, i.e.
Long-term investments as a rule yield a higher return than short-term investments.
transformation of short-term into long-term investments, will in future only be possible at higher interest rates.
The risk of losses or diminished profits arises from the risk of changing demand for and supply of goods.
The risk of changing interest rates arises from the risks of changing productivity of capital and of a changing rate of savings.
All these changes influence security prices.
What are the causes and effects of the more important changes?
These questions will be examined in this section under a specific assumption, namely that the quantity of money present in the economy and the velocity of its turnover do not change.
On the assumption of constant circulation of money, all the money paid out during a production period to the factors of production must be spent on the resulting products.
Total monetary demand remains constant.
To the extent to which demand for consumer goods falls owing to saving there will be a rise in the demand for capital goods and intermediate goods on the part of entrepreneurs, who get as credits such amounts as have been saved.
This law states that all that is produced is also consumed because the factors of production spend all the money they get on the results of their production.
We shall see later that the assumption of Say's law is by no means correct in every case.
The circulation of money can increase and decrease.
In other words, there can be inflation and deflation of money.
One can even go so far as tQ say that stability of money circulation is the exception.
It remains nevertheless important to examine the changing economy under the assumption of an inelastic money circula: tion.
Inflations and deflations are in most cases short-term, reversible phenomena.
Prosperity follows depression.
Only such an analysis can show how the economy would develop if the traditional mistakes 'in monetary and credit policy were avoided-a possibility which many contemporary economists, accustomed as they are to completely elastic supply of money, no longer seem to envisage at all. Even where inflation is not reversible-as it fails to be in the case of governmental mismanagement of the currency, particularly during war-time-analysis on the assumption of inelastic money supply remains of interest.
It shows what happens when, in the further course of an inflation, all members of the community have become fully aware of what is going on and have adjusted their supply and demand for goods and services to the diminishing value of money.
Every economics textbook started with the analysis of an economy exposed to no changes from the money side.
a veil, behind which were hidden real economic processes, but which did not cause these processes.
This has changed radically under the influence of Keynes' General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
Newer textbooks seem no longer to know a world in which money is inelastic.
As a result a whole generation of economists seems to believe that the wealth of nations is dependent upon the willingness to develop effective demand, rather than upon the willingness to work.
And it can be said without exaggeration that no single fact has done modern economic analysis so much harm as the assumption of a very elastic money supply.
This proves-as cannot be stressed too often-that Keynes' theory belongs to the realm of inflation and deflation and business cycle theory and not to that of a general theory.
We shall begin by examining changes in production and consumption.
Changes in Consumption If all the money earned by the factors of production is spent on consumption goods, total consumption remains constant.
Only if production expands or contracts can total consumption expand or contract.
The consumption of individual products can, of course, fluctuate.
Changes in the composition of consumption goods are in the first place due to changes in the taste of consumers.
They can also be due to changes in the distribution of income among the factors of production.
In the short run an increase in demand causes prices to rise substantially above production costs.
But after some time the productive resources of the economy are again directed toward the production of various goods according to the new wishes of "the consumers.
The production of all goods expands up to the point at which the consumers are prepared to pay a price covering the cost of the last unit produced.
Changes in consumption can also be due to changes in production costs and resulting changes in prices.
If production of apples becomes cheaper, whereas the production of pears becomes more expensive, the consumption of apples will increase while the consumption of pears will decline.
THE CHANGING ECONOMY Changes in Production In contrast to consumption, there can be changes in production not only of a qualitative but. also of a quantitative nature.
Given a certain productivity of, and the resulting demand for labor, and given a certain supply of capital, the volume of total production is a function of the supply of labor.
This means that the volume of production depends on the extent to which people are willing to work..
Our view is in fiat contradiction to the prevailing demand theory of employment and production, according to which it is the demand for, rather than the supply of, labor that fundamentally determines employment and production.
In an economy without inflation and deflation the changes from the side of the supply of labor are obviously more important than those from the demand side.
Unemployment, a Vague Concept1 Labor is not offered at any price except under very special conditions.
The quantities offered vary with the wages demanded.
In a free economy there is in the long run and after adjustment to all disturbances only one fair level of wages-the level at which the labor supply is absorbed by the demand for labor.
the least productive worker still employed at given demand.
The Basic Law of Employment Given a certain demand for labor, the degree of employment is a function of the supply price of labor, of wage demands.
It is true even where the elasticity of the demand for labor is small.
There must .always be a wage level that is sufficiently low to guarantee the absorption of supply by demand.
wage level would be indifferent for employment only under the unrealistic assumption that the demand for labor was entirely inelastic, Le.
On the labor market, as on every other market, supply can never exceed demand provided no obstacles are put in the way of price formation.
Growth, as well as cheapening, of labor supply expands the total production of the country.
Whether such an expansion of total production benefits or damages the community as a whole is another question to be discussed later.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS There remains, however, the question whether, for instance, a 10 per cent rise in wage demands always has the same restricting effect as a 10 per cent reduction of work-hours offered.
If, therefore, the labor supply curve is steep, as in Figure 14, the demand of a wage rise of 10 per cent will restrict employment less than a 10 per cent reduction in the work-hours offered at various wage levels.
The rise in wage demands, expressed by an upward shift of the .supply curve to 8 2 , will restrict employment only by ac; an equivalent reduction in work offered, expressed by a shift to the left of the supply curve to 8 1 , will restrict employment by the much larger amount abo Changes in the supply of labor may, but need not, lead to changes in the number of workers employed.
This can happen throughall workers working fewer hours each week, or through some workers not working at all.
Whether the higher cost or the reduction of the supply of labor will actually lead to unemployment or not depends on the manner in which either the offer of weekly work-hours at prevailing wages is reduced or the) wage demands raised.
The weekly work-hours offered may be reduced (a) by all workers being unwilling to work more than a certain time each week, or .
(b) by some workers being unwilling to work at all.
The supply price of labor may rise (c) by wage demands being raised for all weekly work-hours, or (d) by wage demands being raised only for the later hours of weekly work, i.e.
by demands for earlier operation of overtime pay.
In particular, it is not unusual for a claim for shorter weekly work to be combined with a demand for unchanged weekly wages (combination of a and c), which means higher hourly wages.
The labor supply curve then moves upwards as well as to the left, and the curtailing effect on production is cumulative.
A reduction of the working week for all workers (case a) while reducing the total of hours worked creates no unemployment.
The reduced work is spread among the existing number of workers.
If the demand for labor is inelastic it may even happen that the total of hours worked declines less than the hours worked each week by the individual workers.
A reduction of weekly work-hours, through some workers being entirely unwilling to work at the prevailing wage level (case b), creates voluntary unemployment.
A raising of wage demands for all hours (case c) will reduce the number of workers employed.
Entrepreneurs, having to curtail production, will generally prefer to dismiss workers rather than curtail weekly working hours.
A raising of wage demands for the later daily or weekly hours, Le.
To make up for COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS the reduced working time entrepreneurs may employ new workers.
In this case the work is spread among more workers, the number of workers employed increases.
Reasons for Scarcer and Costlier Labor Supply The supply of labor becomes scarcer or costlier when the workers' valuation of the wages offered decreases in relation to their valuation of leisure.
Indeed, economic -history shows examples both of higher wages and of reductions in the weekly working time, as well as of curtailment -of the degree of activity of the population (elimination of child labor, to a large extent of women's labor).
It is to be noted, however, that the workers' claims for shorter working time are apt to meet with obstacles of tradition.
It is hard to predict whether the workers' claims will in the future concentrate more on higher wages or on shorter working time.
Technical progress and increased capital equipment may one day lead to a state of affairs where men will be willing to work only a very few hours each week.
An ever-growing -increase in leisure, rather than, as some fear, over-production of consumption of goods no longer in demand,-may turn out to be the end of a development which would leave a rational use 'of leisure as the only problem.
Labormay not because workers wish to be unemployed rather than work at the prevailing wagerate,but because they try by means of the strike to obtain wages which they believe entrepreneurscould pay without resulting unemployment.
Union Action The effects of minimum wage laws and of laws limiting the supply of labor, such as laws forbidding the occupation of minors,are demonstrated in Figure 15.
Minimum wage laws create, as it were, an artificial labor supply curve running horizontally at the minimum wage level.
All those whose services are no longer demanded at.
The interval ac represents the production-curtailing effect.
It only shows the curtailing effect of such laws on production, against which have to be weighed the favorable effects on the health and the general well-being of those remaining in employment and of those now unemployed.
In principle, its effect is a general increase in the price of too cheap labor, and therefore an upward bending of the left side of the supply curve (8) in Figure 16 to, say, a point X which is higher than the free market price of labor.
an improvement in the situation of those employed (ab) to the detriment of those who become unemployed (be) because their services are no longer demanded at the new, higher, wage THE CHANGING ECONOMY level.
The least skilled and least productive workers are the chief sufferers.
The Demand Curve for Labor The effects of changes in labor supply are, of course, largely dependeIit upon how much of the labor offered at various prices entrepreneurs are able to employ, Of, in the language of curve analysis, on the shape of the demand curve for labor.
We have in principle to start from the fact mentioned in Part I that, according to the law of diminishing marginal returns, the productivity of the individual worker-given a certain amount of capital-is reduced through the employment of new workers, because the capital equipment per worker becomes scantier.
It follows that entrepreneurs disposing of a given amount of credit will, in principle, employ new workers only at lower wages corresponding to their lower productivity.
The demand curve for labor will thus in fact run downward to the right.
Whether its slope will be more or less steep depends, of course, on the degree to which a diminution of capital equipment per worker reduces the productivity of labor.
We must assume that the reduction in productivity is a significant one, Le.
that the demand curve has a steep slope.
Under modern conditions a newly employed worker can have the same productivity as those already employed only if an equal amount of capital is invested for him.
Where this is impossible, because the amount of capital is given, the productivity per worker must fall sharply when the number of workers grows.
All this rests on the assumption that entrepreneurs neither do nor need to reckon with changes in the price level for finished goods.
Effects of Changes in Labor Supply Assuming, then, a demand curve running steeply downward to the right, what will be the effects of changes in labor supply?
COMMONSENSE ECONOMICS In the first instance it will be seen that if the labor supply curve 8 moves downward to 8 1 , employment increases by abo The increase in employment causes an increase in the product, but this increase in the product is smaller than the one resulting from the preceding additions to employment because the new workers, as explained above, have a lower productivity.
If the demand curve D had a horizontal course, total wages would not fall.
The decreased wage demands would spend themselves in an increase of employment.
If the demand curve were vertical, i.e.
if no capital at all were available for the purpose of employing additional workers, total wages would fall by the whole amount of the reduction in wage .demands (AE).
That wages fall by less than AE is due to the fact that the demand curve is not completely inelastic.
Where does the capital come from which entrepreneurs need for the employment of new workers, since we have assumed that the total amount of available credit is given?
The answer is this: employment of new workers not only leads to a fall in the marginal productivity of labor; it leads at the same time to an increase in the marginal productivity of capital, since the demand for capital per worker becomes more urgent.
As a result, capital will be withdrawn from the most labor-saving enterprises.
The credits saved in long production detours can, by widening the capital structure, be used in shorter production detours.
This saving of credits in the longer production detours is the reversal of the phenomenon discussed in Part I in connection with the need for larger credits for longer production detours.
Employment will fall, the volume of production will shrink and wages will rise.
Capital will be re-directed from the shortest to the longest production detours.
This is an expression of the fact that capital no longer needed for the payment of the marginal workers and their equipment THE CHANGING ECONOMY with capital can now be used.
to increase the productivity of the workers still employed, by transition to more capitalistic methods of production.
11 Reaction on Profits -and Interest Figure 17 shows that a reduction in"wage demands decreases the wages of aU workers to the level of productivity of the "new" marginal worker.
These extra profits will induce entrepreneurs to compete for the given amount of capital and to bid up interest rates.
As a result, capitalists will receive higher interest, an expression of the fact that the productivity of capital has risen through the increase in labor employment.
When the factors of production later spend their income, they will realize that interest rates have risen.
Entrepreneurs will thus be enabled to increase the capital equipment per worker, and the productivity of labor will rise.
The demand curve D in Figure 17 will become less steep.
The product increases, wages rise and interest per unit of capital remains lqwer than assumed above.
Changes in the Demand for Labor We have so far examined the effects of changes in the supply of labor at a given demand for labor.
We shall now examine the effects of changes in the demand for labor.
The demand for labor may change for a variety of reasons.
One reason is to be found in the changes of capital supply, to be discussed later.
The main reason, however, is a change in the productivity of labor.
A change in the productivity of labor is not identical with a change in the productivity of capital applied to labor, although this is assumed in most wage negotiations.
The productivity of labor increases when technical improvements enable savings of labor in proportion to the amount of labor applied; the productivity of capital increases when such improvements enable savings of labor in proportion to the amount of capital applied.
When the productivity of capital is increased labor saving will therefore be negligible in industries using little capital, but very important in industries with large capital investments per unit of product.
THE CHANGING ECONOMY Changes in the Productivity of Labor A change in the productivity of labor creates a whole chain of reactions.
Workers are set free in those enterprises in which the increase in the productivity of labor makes workers Wage f s o d ------c B ----------A s/!
On the other hand, in other enterprises hitherto unemployable labor can be set to work, because the higher output per work-hour allows the employment of labor previously too expensive or of too low productivity.
Since the productivity of the individual worker has incrt(ased, entrepreneurs will be prepared to pay higher wages according to the higher productivity.
The demand curve D will move COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS up to D 1  This has, in the first place, the result that employment increases byab.
Since, at the same time, the productivity of the workers has.
risen, the increase is this time greater than that due to cheaper labor supply.
This increase is smaller than would correspond to the increase in productivity because the wages of all workers are in accordance with the productivity of the marginal worker.
Entrepreneurs make an extra profit, represented by the difference between the triangle dgB and the triangle cAf.
These extra profits induce entrepreneurs to compete for the given amount of capital.
Again the answer is that they pay their workers with capital p.itherto used in the longest production detours.
The higher productivity of labor makes it profitable to withdraw capital from the longest production detours and to use it for paying labor, even though the latter has become more expensive.
A decrease in the productivity of labor has opposite effects.
The marginal productivity of the capital distributed among fewer and less productive workers falls, and with it the interest rate.
In our days, with free market conditions, except in time of war or other catastrophes, it is hardly likely that the productivity of labor will fall.
New methods of production are permanently at work to raise, not to lower, the productivity of labor.
However, the productivity of labor is sometimes lowered artificially.
Changes in the Productivity of Capital As we have stated earlier, changes in the productivity of capital are not to be confused with changes in the productivity of labor.
Increased productivity of capital normally causes TH'E CHANGING ECONOMY entrepreneurs to raise their offers of interest and thereby leads to higher income for the capitalists.
In a free' competitive economy the workers can benefit, from an increase in the productivity of capital only when the supply of capital grows at the same rate as the demand for capital and when, therefore, interest rates do not change.
In this case, competition among the entrepreneurs leads them to bid up wages according to their own higher profits.
Trade unions often consciously or unconsciously claim for their members wage increases corresponding to the increased productivity of capital.
Unless the supply of capital has risen to the extent of the increased demand for capital, the enforcement of higher wages is bound to give rise to unemployment.
But even when interest rates do not go up, because capital supply has increased and entrepreneurs are therefore in a position to grant wage increases-even then higher wages must lead to temporary unemployment in some enterprises.
The benefits of increased productivity of capital are obviously much higher in enterprises needing much capital than in those needing less capital.
Given a more or less uniform wage level, labor will have to shift from less capitalistic to more capitalistic enterprises, so that the latter can absorb the workers dismissed by the former.
It is often maintained that the productivity of labor as ,well as that of capital increases when wages are forced up by trade unions.
In fact, this argument is used in favor of wages increasing ahead .of an .increase in the productivity of labor and capital.
The truth iS,however, that entrepreneurs are permanently at work to lower costs by new production methods and thus to maximize profits.
Wage increases ahead of productivity increases as such do not accelerate this process.
What wage increases are doing is to increase the productivity of labor, because they make labor scarce and cause capital equipment per remaining worker to increase.
In the last resort this means substitution of capital for labor.
Under our assumption of a given capital supply (in fact always except under the assumption of a very elastic capital supply...;..-a very unrealistic assumption in a non-inflation economy) the substituting capital COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS will never be sufficient to replace all workers dismissed.
Nor will the new capital installations provide employment opportunities for the workers dismissed as too expensive.
The capital structure has deepened but also narrowed, with the result that the total product of the economy does not grow but diminishes.
Every change in the supply of or the demand for one factor of production, e.g.
capital, change to the same extent, any such change in the total product is always accompanied by a change in the distribution of the product among the factors of production.
If, for instance, total output increases because labor supply has grown, wages go down and interest rates up.
If the increase in total output is due to an increase in the productivity of labor, wages go up, but less than would correspond to the increase in productivity.
If more labor is combined with the same amount of capital, the marginal productivity of labor and the wage level decrease.
Since to apply more labor to the same amount of capital means, by implication, less capital in relation to the previous amount of labor,.
the marginal productivity of capital and the interest rate increase.
If the greater employment of labor is due to an increase in the productivity of labor, the wage level does not fall absolutely, but only in relation to the higher productivity.
Changes in the wages of individual workers per unit of their THE CHANGING ECONOMY contribution, say one work-hour, have to be distinguished strictly from changes in the total wage bill accruing to labor as a whole.
the workers formerly employed and those newly employed, will increase both absolutely and relatively.
The total wage bill paid out to the increased labor force always increases more than the interest paid to the capitalists for the same capital.
'Yet the share of the individual worker in the proceeds of one hour's work will have decreased.
Yet the hourly wage of the individual worker will have increased.
The elasticity of the demand for labor is of decisive importance here, because it determines the ~xtent to which higher wages are accompanied by a large or small decline of the total product.
Changes in Supply of Capital The supply of capital can change in two ways.
who refrain from consumption-offer the same amounts of capital at higher or lower interest rates, or they offer bigger or smaller amounts at given interest rates.
Normally both cases have the same result: the amount of capital used in the economy increases or decreases.
If the factors of production save part of their income and put it at the disposal of entrepreneurs, purchases of products for more or less rapid consumption are replaced by entrepreneurs' purchases of capital goods or intermediate products.
After a transition period, which we shall describe later, this will result in a lengthening of the production detours by adding, as it were, a lengthening piece to all production detours.
It may not COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS actually cost more than the former hand tools, but its installation requires more credit, since the capital invested does not reach the consumption stage until much later and the credits, therefore, cannot be repaid until then.
The production detours are shortened.
Increase of capital results, of course, in higher productivity of the labor now used in more capitalistic production methods.
Decrease of capital, on the other hand, results in lower productivity of labor.
It is an axiom of classical economics that on every market the supply increases with higher prices, except under very special conditions.
As regards the supply of capital, it has been pointed out that those wishing to provide for old age through saving might save less, rather than more, when the interest rate is higher because the accumulated interest would then contribute more to the sum desired as provision for old age.
They simply compare the utility of present consumption with the utility of future consumption.
And as higher interest rates increase the sum available for future consumption, because the accumulation of interest at the future THE CHANGING ECONOMY date becomes greater, the propensity to save will, .other things being equal, increase as interest rates rise.
Although the matter is highly complicated, as will be evident later on" we can start from the assumption that as a rule the supply of capital is a positive function of the interest rate.
If interest rates rise,for instance, .because of higher demand for capital, more will be saved per unit of time.
too, induce people to shift their present consumption to the future.
If inflation progresses quickly or over long periods, the population becomes inflation-conscious and apprehensive of further inflation.
Here, under the influence of Keynes, a whole set of opinions has developed which has no foundation in reality.
A socalled psychological law allegedly induces people to set aside a higher percentage of their income for future consumption, the more the necessities of the present are covered.
This assertion often leads to far-reaching conclusions, especially to the so-called stagnation theory to which we shall return later.
No distinction is made between increases in the income of individuals compared to the income of other individuals, and increases in the income of the whole community; nor is one made in the latter between short-run, especially cyclical, and long-run changes.
When an individual's income increases, his savings rate will as a rule increase.
But so long as the income of the whole community remains the same, the incomes of other individuals must obviously decline, as must their savings rates.
Unless, COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS then, the whole community becomes richer, the average savings rate, and thus aggregate saving per unit of time, cannot increase through some individuals becoming richer.
If, on the other hand, a whole community's income increases -and the only way this can happen in real terms is through increased work or increased productivity of labor-the total amount of saving generally grows, but the savings rates do not increase.
It is quite easy to understand.
An individual becoming rich acquires the traditional consumption habits of the higher income brackets, where indeed larger parts of income are saved.
There is no reason why their propensity for future spending should increase more than their propensity for present spending.
A sort of inverse psychological law seems to induce at least Americans of today to spend more in the present, once a certain provision, for the future has been secured.
In the short run, especially during a business cycle, savings rates indeed do fluctuate with income.
But this has nothing to do with the psychological law establishing a growing preference for future consumption.
Something quite different is at work: during an upswing prices rise because of credit and monetary expansion; people, not accustomed to the new prices, decide to wait with spending until prices come down again.
But as higher real incomes are chiefly the result of higher productivity through increased use of capital, such higher income.s will not change the relative strength of demand for and supply of capital.
The fears of the so-called stagnation school, which since the publication of Keynes' General Theory has been alarming the world with the assertion that savings will outrun investment opportunities, are obviously unfounded both when based on an increase in the savings rate and on an absolute increase in saviBgs.
Changes in Demand for Capital We have seen that increased supply of capital leads to a lengthening, and a decreased supply leads to a shortening of the roundabout methods of production.
Increased demand for capital leads to exactly the same result as increased supply, namely to an increased use of capital and thus to a lengthening of the roundabout ways.
Decreased demand for capital leads to the same result as decreased supply, namely to decreased use of capital and a shortening of production detours.
The effects of changes in demand for capital on interest rates, however, are opposite to those resulting from changes in supply.
Whereas increased supply leads to lower interest rates, increased demand leads to higher ones.
And whereas decreased supply leads to higher interest rates, decreased demand leads to lower ones.
The effects of changes in supply of and demand for capital on the amounts of capital used and on interest rates are demonstrated in Figure 19.
When supply of capital moves from 8 to 8 1 (representing a decline in supply) the amount of capital used declines by de, just as it does if demand moves from D to D 1 (representing a COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS decline in demand).
Interest rates, however, rise by ab in the first case, but fall by ac in the latter case.
When the supply of capital moves from 8 to 8 2 (indicating an increase in supply), the amount of capital used increases by df, Rate of b interest D1 D Of e d f Quantity of capital used FIG.
19 just at it does when demand moves from D to D 2 (indicating an increase in demand).
Interest rates fall by ac in the first case, but rise by ab in the latter.
We have already mentioned one of the reasons for increase and decrease in the demand for capital.
We have described how an increase or decrease in the number of workers alters the marginal productivity of capital and thus causes demand for capital to increase or decrease.
We have seen that, for instance, an enlarged labor supply as a rule increases the demand for capital because it encourages entrepreneurs to compete for the existing capital and to bid up interest rates.
Besides such induced increases and decreases in demand for capital, there are also autonomous increases and decreases.
The chief reason for autonomous increase is to be found in new inventions enhancing productivity, Le.
the labor-saving THE CHANGING ECONOMY effect of capital.
If,by applying x units of capital, one can save not y but 2y workers, one will be able to pay 2z instead of only z as interest on these capital units.
Autonomous decreases in the demand for capital never happen for economic reasons, since technical development always progresses and never regresses.
Any threats-such as political unrest or widespread strikes- to the continued use of the plant to be built, or the machines to be installed, lower the demand for capital.
Changes "in Capital Supply and Demand Influence Demand for Labor We have described above how changes in the demand for and supply of labor give rise to induced changes in the demand for capital.
We have seen that when, for instance, the supply of or the demand for labor grows, the latter because of an increase in the productivity of labor, the demand for capital rises.
If the supply of or the demand for capital rises, the latter because the productivity .of capital has gone up, there is an induced demand for labor.
Through the use of cheaper or more productive capital the entrepreneurs reap extra profits, enabling them to compete for the existing labor and to bid up wages.
Should the supply of or the demand for capital fall, which is unlikely to happen in the long run, the result would be.a reduction in employment and a fall in wages.
Personal and Corporation Taxes Influence Capital Supply and .
Demand Taxes exercise a decisive influence on the demand for and the supply of capital and thus on the volume of production.
Income taxes affect the borrowers as well as the lenders of capital.
Borrowers of capital-in the wider sense comprising financing through the issue of shares, etc.-include in the first place corporations but also single entrepreneurs working with other people's money.
The lenders include the capitalists proper but also the entrepreneur-capitalists, Le.
entrepreneurs substantially working with their own capital.
In so far as the income of the first group is derived from the use of capital, an income tax is bound to reduce the demand for capital.
If, for instance, a corporation has to pay taxes in the amount of 50 per cent of its revenue from capital, it will obviously be able to offer only half the compensation for the use of capital-at least against common and preferred shares-that it could offer without the tax.
Higher income taxes for the second group, the capitalists and entrepreneur-capitalists, on the other hand, result in a reduction of supply.
In the case of a 50 per cent income tax the capitalist will, in principle, offer the entrepreneur the same amount of capital, and the entrepreneurcapitalist will employ his own capital, only at twice the interest.
It is always the net amount to be earned which counts for those who demand, and the net amount received which counts for those who supply capital.
It follows that in so far as the supply of capital is not completely inelastic, i.e.
in so far as capitalists are unwilling to supply the same amounts of capital at lower interest rates, both corporation taxes and personal taxes are bound to have a restricting effect on the use of capital.
This effect, in turn, can lead to the shifting of such taxes on to the workers or consumers.
To the extent to which wages fall as a result of smaller capital equipment, or fail to rise as much as they would have done otherwise, the burden of the tax is shifted on to the workers.
To the extent to which smaller capital equipment causes production costs to rise, the burden may be shifted on to the consumers.
There are good reasons for believing that such shifts have, indeed, taken place in the past.
By pressing, in all countries, for ever higher corporation taxes labor appears therefor~ somewhat shortsighted.
It should also .be mentioned that a strongly progressive income tax not only tends to reduce the supply of capital in general but brings about a relative scarcity of venture capital, i.e.
capital prepared to take risks.
For the capitalists' profits are taxed away to a greater or lesser degree, while they are left with the losses.
A relative scarcity of risk capital is bound to reinforce the tendency towards curtailment of production.
Very high income taxes must have serious consequences for production and employment, unless the State were to take over the role of the private investor, in one form or another, in accordance with the predictions of Keynes and the wishes of socialists and communists.
Changes in Use of Capital Coupled to Changes in Income Distribution We again encounter the law mentioned above, according to which the use of a factor of production-and thus the total output-and the distribution of income are linked to each other.
If more capital is used (capital being in cheaper supply or more productive), the whole output increases, but the compensation of the capitalist per unit of capital employed decreases.
When the use of capital increases owing to cheaper or increased supply of capital this is self-evident, because in this case the interest rate falls.
When the use of capital increases owing to higher productivity \of, and hence higher demand for, capital the interest rate rises, but the compensation per unit of capital nevertheless decreases relatively to the compensation of labor because for a given labor force wages rise more than interest per unit of capital.
If less capital is used, the opposite development takes place.
The compensation of the capitalist per unit of capital increases.
The amount saved per unit of capital, because of lower interest rates, accrues to COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS labor in the form of higher wages.
This is why labor .is so interested in strong capital formation.
Whereas the compensation of the capitalist per unit of capital employed declines with greater use of capital, the compensation for the whole of the, now, larger capital employed nevertheless increases, although not proportionally to the increase in the capital employed.
Therefore the share of the total product going to th~ capitalists as a class also increases both absolutely and relatively.
But the increase in the share of capital is smaller than the increase in the use of capital.
On this assumption total demand cannot be affected by fluctuations either in consumption or in investment.
saves less, aggregate demand increases because investment does not fall off.
This increase in demand is even said to be cumulative, because, according to the so-called acceleration principle, increased consumption causes increased investment expenditure.
On the other hand, it is also said that aggregate demand rises when more is invested.
This increase, too, is said to be cumulative, because, according to the so-called multiplier theory, increased investment causes increased consumption expenditure.
To a certain extent, of course, they simply follow from the assumption underlying this part of our analysis, namely that inflation and deflation of purchasing power are absent from the economy.
On this assumption investment and saving must THE CHANGING ECONOMY always balance without the aid of the phenomena resulting from inflation or deflation.
In .such an economy saving and investment are, of course, never in equilibrium without the aid of inflation and deflation.
Surpluses can push money out of circulation and deficits can draw money into circulation.
When examining the phenomena of inflation and deflation we shall, later, have to deal extensively with the disappearance of money into "death traps," as this process has been called, and its reappearance from th~m.Here it sufficesto state that except under special conditions involving certain' rigidities money does not in the long run disappear in death traps.
Hence there can, in the long run, be neither too much nor too little saving and investment.
If this is true, then the volume of production does not, in principle, depend upon fluctuations in expenditure but upon the people's willingness to work.
Under-employment as .such does not Invalidate this Statement The description is also important for the following reason.
Keynesians generally concede.that increased investment implies decreased consumption and increased consumption implies decreased investment in a fully employed economy, but maintain that as long as unemployment prevails increased con- sumption leads indeed to increased investment and increased investment to increased consumption.
Our description puts this under-employment argument-with which, incidentally, the most paradoxical statements are sometimes. justified-in its COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS right place.
First, no degree of under-employment whateveraccepting for once this vague notion-can have the result that more investment creates more consumption, or more consumption more investment as long as inflation is prevented.
In an economy exposed to inflation, the latter can produce additional investment and additional consumption.
In real terms what is more consumed under inflation is less invested, and what is more invested is less consumed.
It does not protect money inflation from resulting in pure price inflation, contrary to what is so often assumed.
It will lead to increased production-and thus to increased real investment or real consumption-only under one of the two conditions: Either the labor supply curve must remain stable in spite of rising prices-for any length of time an entirely unrealistic assumption of Keynes who maintains that the supply of labor is not a function of real wages (General Theory, p. 8); or labor supply must be perfectly elastic for a certain time, as in the special situation of the recovery phase of the business cycle.
We will treat these matters when dealing with effects of inflation (pp.
117 and 176) and the business cycle (pp.
To treat business cycle phenomena as general cases and to build on them a general theory can only lead to general confusion.
Deflationary Effect of Increased Employment Our analysis so far was implicitly based on the assumption that, so long as the circulation of money is inelastic, the general level of prices and wages is not subject to any changes.
The assumption of an unchanging price level needs to be qualified when more labor is employed owing to an increased supply of labor or capital, i.e.
Whether the money needed for the payment of the workers is withdrawn from longer production detours, or whether it is made available by new saving, the fact remains that this money now has to be turned over twice during the same period.
It is now no longer spent by the consumer or entrepreneur himself for the products of the past period, but is in the first place used for wage payments.
Unless, then, the money simultaneously present in the economy is increased, or unless its velocity of circula~ion increases, the money will not be sufficient to payout all the credits which ought to be available according to the savings situation.
It is often said that a growing economy, which means in essence one in which employment rises, requires money circulation to be increased.
This is a justified claim, but it is justified not because the economy could not otherwise grow, .but because its wage and price system would be subject to considerable deflationary pressure even if enough new savings to pay the new workers were forthcoming.
2 Wage and Price Level-and Increase in Productivity Further difficulties are involved when there is an increase of the productivity of labor, which we discussed above.
Here an additional need for money arises from the increase in wages due to higher productivity of labor.
At a given circulation of money this increased need for money must again lead to a deflationary situation such as that described above.
In this connection, too, an increase of money is often demanded; the volume of money should be adjusted to the increase in the volume of 'goods due to the higher productivity.
We are here faced with a dilemma: to satisfy this claim would mean withholding the benefits of the higher productivity See, however, p. 123.
The other alternative, namely deflation of the price level at constant wages, meets with the resistance particularly of the debtor class, which incurs losses if the prices of its inventories fall while its monetary debts remain the same.
3 Changes in Consumption and Investment do not Change Employment Unless changes in consumption and investment lead to inflation or deflation, they cannot have any influence on aggregate employment.
If less is consumed, for instance-which means that more is saved-more will be invested, there will be more employment in capital goods industries and less in consumption goods industries.
The aggregate demand for labor remains unchanged.
There is only a shift in demand as between industries.
But even where changes in saving or investment do lead to inflation or deflation, because money disappears in death traps or reappears from them, they can lead to fluctuations in employment only under the special conditions already mentioned.
Employment never fluctuates if labor demands higher money wages when prices rise through inflation and is content with lower money wages when prices fall through deflation.
We shall later come back again to the problem of nonadjustment of nominal wage demands to a rising price level.
Here it suffices to state that as long as wage demands are fully adjusted to changes in the value of money inflation and deflation simply lead to, or are identical with, changes in the level of wages and prices but do not alter the employment level.
THE CHANGING ECONOMY United States, in contrast to the countries of Europe which enjoyed full employment.
Unemployment had nothing to do with deficient demand, whether due to exce.ssive saving, low investment or any other reasons.
This is denied by New Dealers and trade unions.
They maintain that many other reasons could have been causal-for instance the pessimistic expectations of business men, the scarcities in construction credits,and so on.
But a look at the charts of the pertinent data (investments, money circulation, bank credits, etc.)
What happened was simply that labor had priced itself out of employment by autonomous decision favored by the New Deal administration.
It was replaced by capital that had become cheaper.
Exactly the same happened in Germany during the years 1926 and 1929, when in an inflationary environment-created by cheap foreign loans-many millions became unemployed as much as two years before the deflation of 1929.4 Many New Dealers and Keynesians believe, in accordance with certain theses in Keynes' General Theory, that too high wages not only do not prevent full employment but actually raise the level of employment by increasing demand for goods and thus for labor.
We shall deal with the fallacies of this so-called purchasing.power theory later on.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS correct or incorrect expectation or anticipation of future changes determine the decisions of the economic subjects.
Everything we have said so far was based on the assumption that demand and supply decisions of factors of production, and more particularly of entrepreneurs, are influenced by the changes actually taking place.
what is produced in the current production period, for the simple reason that production takes time.
Therefore, entrepreneurs must always try to visualize what changes may take place in the future.
Unfortunately the future can never be anticipated with certainty.
Were this otherwise, were the future recognizable with certainty by everyone, all future changes would be.
discounted in advance as if the future were the present.
No price changes could happen any more between the present and the future.
In fact, it is a prerequisite of market changes that future changes in data are not, or not sufficiently, recognized by all the parties on the market, i.e.
In a certain sense the prices of the present always rest on errors..
far-reaching consequences for the structure of the economy as a whole, as well as for the profit and loss situation of individual entrepreneurs.
This suggests that the classical procedure of bagatellizing in general the problems of anticipations remains correct within wide limits.
Misdirection of production must ensue.
This is THE CHANGING ECONOMY misdirection of production within the group of consumption goods.
More important is the misdirection of production in respect of whole groups of goods.
When savings increase, the demand for capital goods rises while the demand for consumption goods contracts.
Most entrepreneurs adjust their production to cha.nged demand only when the change in the latter has actually taken place.
In many cases adjustment to the new demand pattern takes place even later, when the machines serving only the production of goods now in reduced demand have been used up.
Only then can entrepreneurs recover the capital they need for starting up new production.
The prices of some goods fall, and the prices .of others rise.
Price increases above production cost will be considered as temporary by buyers, price declines below production cost as temporary by sellers.
Apart from exceptional cases the former prefer to wait with their purchases and the latter with their sales, until production' has adjusted itself to the new demand pattern.
Profits Result from Correct Anticipations Without errors about the future there could be no profits.
Profits, as defined by us, disappear as soon as the supply and demand of all producers have been adjusted to changes.
In fact, however, entrepreneurs do not at once bid up the prices of the factors of production to the point where future price rises can no longer yield profits.
Those entrepreneurs who have anticipated higher prices and have therefore enlisted factors of production at the ruling, lower, prices make profits; those who have not anticipated higher prices and have wholly or partly abstained from enlisting factors of production fail to make profits or even suffer losses.
As the future approaches and becomes the present, everybody recognizes the changes.
More and more entrepreneurs raise their bids for factors of production-when there is a rise in the price of goods.
Finally, there is no further possibility of making profits through correct anticipation of this particular segment of the future.
At the same time, however, a new segment of the future appears on the horizon of time..Again, guesses about the future have to be made; again there are possibilities of error, and again possibilities of making profits by avoiding errors.
Each new segment of the future is as uncertain as the one before.
The changes taking place in one period can never do more than indicate a tendency of price movements-they can never definitely determine future prices, since, as the future approaches, prices begin to feel the influence of the expectations of a more distant future.
In statistical works on the distribution of income the statement is often found that profits are stable in the longrun, in the sense that the percentage of national income distributed as profits does not change over long periods.
These statements are, however, not concerned with profits as defined by us above, but rather with the incomes of corporations and individual business men from interest and rents of all kinds.
Security Prices and Changes in Demand for and Supply of Capital Let us briefly examine some consequences of what we have said for the stock markets.
If interest rates decline owing to declining demand for or rising supply of capital, or if interest rates rise for the opposit~ reasons, this must have decisive effects on the prices of shares and bonds.
Shares, common as well as preferred, and bonds represent capital invested in an enterprise.
We may start from the simplest case that, as time goes on, this capital is always set to .work again-reinvested-by the enterprise.
The earnings on these THE CHANGING ECONOMY investments must obviously be identical with the benefits derived from the marginal unit of capital to be used, i.e.
because of labor becoming more demanding, then the earnings of the .companies will decline and so will interest rates.
For earnings decline neither more nor less than the interest rates at which these earnings are capitalized.
But where the securities bear fixed dividends or interests, as in the case of preferred shares and bonds, their prices must go up.
For the payments received remain the same-whereas the capitalization factor, the interest rate, has declined.
The prices of common shares of companies with bond or preferred issues ahead must decline, because the earnings of these companies have to cover fixed bond interests and preferred dividends.
If, on the other hand, capital invested in enterprises yields more than previouslY,for instance because the productivity of capital has increased, then the earnings of the companies will rise and so will the interest rate.
Therefore there will again be no changes in the prices for shares with variable dividend rates because the higher dividends are now capitalized at a higher interest rate.
But where the dividends or interests are fixed for long periods,as with preferred shares and bonds, prices will decline.
For the fixed dividends or interests are now capitalized at .a higher interest rate.
Prices of common shares of companies with preferred shares and bonds ahead will rise.
All this supposes, however, that all the capital invested in an enterprise can, in fact, always be reinvested whenever a change occurs.
This is, however, only correct from the moment when capital, frozen in production detours of a certain length, can be replaced.
Until then, the old capital may yield less than the new capital.
if, for instance, interest rates decline under the .impact of increased savings, enterprises beginning at that moment to build their plant can invest in a more capitalistic way.
The old enterprises will be forced through competition to pay the same COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS higher wages, but can profit from the advantages of the longer production detours only after the old plant is amortized and replaced.
The prices of shares of the former enterprises will for a certain time remain below the prices of shares of the latter.
If, on the other hand, interest rates rise under the impact of contracting savings, enterprises then beginning to build their plant can invest in a less capitalistic manner.
They need less capital and thereby save interest.
The prices of shares of the former enterprises will for a certain time remain below the prices of shares of the latter, except if they have covered their long term capital needs at the previous, lower, rates of interest.
Rents and monopoly profits are, in general, not affected by changes in demand for and supply of capital.
Therefore, a fall in interest rates will raise the prices of shares with earnings coming largely from rents and monopoly profits, and a rise in interest rates will depress the prices of such shares.
Corporation Taxes and Share Prices Corporation taxes are taxes on the earnings of corporations.
They tend, as demonstrated above (p. 90), to lower the demand for capital.
The effects on share prices of such a reduction in demand for capital will, however, be somewhat different from those of declining demand for capital in general.
For corporation taxes lower the earnings only of corporations, not of other entrepreneurs whose business is not incorporated.
Investors, however, will compare the reduced earnings of THE CHANGING ECONOMY corporations with other, not reduced, earnings on capital.
For it is only the net earningsearnings after taxes-not the gross earnings that count for the investors.
A capitalist who newly invests in shares does not suffer through the introduction or raising of a corporation tax.
He buys the reduced earnings at a correspondingly lower price, so that the net yield of his capital is not impaired.
The old shareholders, however, suffer through the introduction or increase of corporation taxes.
The introduction of a 50 per cent corporation tax threatens the old shareholders theoretically with a loss of 50 per cent of their capital.
Personal Income Taxes and Share Prices Personal income taxes on earnings from capital reduce the supply of capital, as explained above.
The effects on share prices of such.
a reduction in the supply of capital will, again, be somewhat different from those of a reduction in the supply of capital in general.
Progressive income taxes, such as are usual nowadays, do not affect all kinds of investment in the same manner.
Under a system of highly progressive income taxes the lower income on bondsis less affected than the higher income on shares.
The investor might decide that the net earnings of common shares, which are significantly reduced by the progressive taxes, are no longer a sufficient compensation for the higher risk.
For, again, it is only the net earnings, the earnings remaining after payment of taxes, that enter into his calculations.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS A capitalist who newly invests in shares after the introduction or raising of a progressive income tax will not be affected by the fall in share prices.
It is a well-known fact that during the 1940s the yields of common stocks in the U.S. increased on the average, whereas the yields on bonds declined: the margin between bond and share yields widened substantially.
Investment in common shares with its much greater risk seems to have appealed to capitalists in high income brackets only at yields compensating at least partly for the higher income taxes.
It is, however, too early to judge whether a structural change in the attitude of investors has taken place or whether only the wellknown phenomenon of boom periods is repeating itself.
Part III THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION T he Preconditions of Inflation and Deflation So far we have examined the working of an economy in which the volume of money and its velocity of circulation remain unchanged.
This is why the study of preconditions and the effects of inflation and deflation are of such paramount importance.
Many, one can almost say most, seemingly very complicated questions-also in the field of the theory of foreign trade, as for instance regarding the foreign trade multiplier-become easily solvable when analyzed in terms of inflation and deflation theory.
Much has been written about the circumstances in which inflation and deflation of the circulation of money should be tolerated or avoided.
It is generally held that the circulation of money should be neutral, i.e.
should be regulated in such a manner that the price level is not influenced from the "money side."
But what if there are influences tending to change the value of money, originating on the "goods side"?
Should such influences be compensated from the money side?
If, for instance, productivity of labor rises, as discussed earlier, should a deflation of the price level be tolerated or prevented?
But it is neutral only to this extent because other effects of inflation-such as inflation profits due to price support in spite of lower costs and a resulting inducement to expand production-are by no means ruled out.
without inflation of the price level, is highly controversial it seems to be generally agreed that inflation and deflation involving changes in the price level represent a degree of unneutrality that should, in principle, be avoided.
But obviously neither inflation nor deflation can occur unless money is somehow able to disappear from circulation into death traps.
The question of which conditions lead to inflation and deflation is, therefore, identical with the question of which conditions force money out of or into these death traps.
Two sorts of death traps have to be distinguished in a modern economy-the cash hoards of private individuals and the cash reserves of the Central Banks.
The role played by money substitutes, chiefly demand deposits with banks, will be discussed later.
The Myth of the Small Death Traps The appearance and disappearance of money out of and into private hoards can also be regarded as a change in the velocity of money turnover.
The reason for private hoarding-or for a decrease in the velocity of monetary circulation-is nowadays mostly explained in terms of the liquidity preference theory, as developed by Keynes.
Interest is, indeed, regarded as compensation for parting with cash, Le.
with liquidity, rather than as compensation for abstaining from consumption and thereby making credits THE ECONOMY IN' INFLATION AND DEFLATION available.
The factual assumptions underlying this reasoning are, like so many others in modern theory, entirely unrealistic.1 Interest rates on the one hand, and investment and consumption decisions on the other, 'influence each other, but they by no means determine the amount of cash the business community and private individuals keep in their office safes or at home.
Nor do cash holdings increase if interest rates fall to zero or near zero because of very low credit demand.
Very low interest rates, or even no interest at all, do not seem to induce people to keep their money at home.
Some people, of course, have no bank accounts, and others may, in special circumstances, prefer to keep some of their unspent and uninvested money in their own pockets or desk .drawers.
Such an increase can, in fact, be observed in times of depression.
Any theory of inflationary and deflationary gaps, if resting on the existence of the small death traps, is therefore untenable.
The Large Death Traps Much more important nowadays than the small death traps are the large death traps: the Central Banks into which money 1 See Chapter 13 of my Economics of Illusion, to which the reader is especially referred.
power to destroy and to create money.
These death traps open whenever there is a significant difference between interest rates prevailing on the money and capital markets on the one hand; and on the other hand the Central Banks' discount rate for commercial bills-the bank rate-which also determines the price at which Central Banks buy and sell government bonds by so-called open market operations.
When, for instance, the interest rates on the credit markets are higher than the bank rate, individuals and banks will sell bills and bonds to the Central Banks.
The cash paid out by the latter for the bills and bonds swells the circulation of money and thereby creates money inflation.
In the contrary case when the bank rate is higher than the market rate, individuals and banks will redeem bills and bonds from the Central Banks.
Cash will flow from circulation into the Central Banks' cash reserves, and money deflation will ensue.
In a world with changing rates the large death traps are, therefore, opened by the unwillingness or inability of the Central Banks to adjust their rates to the market rates so quickly that neither purchases from nor sales to the Central Banks are made.
The relative stability and rigidity of the bank rate is, therefore, in the last instance the cause of the instability and flexibility of the monetary system.
The latter sort of non-adjustment is a typical feature of business cycles.
During the upswing the demand .for credit increases.
Interest rates have a rising tendency.
If the bank rate moved up accordingly, the large death traps would remain closed because, however strong the demand for credits, there is always an interest rate high enough to prevent a further expansion of the circulation-even without applying such crude means as credit restrictions.
During a depression, on the other hand, the demand for credit declines and interest rates THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION havea falling tendency.
If bank rates were lowered accordingly, no deflation would occur, provided the demand for credit did not become so .abnormally low as to force interest rates on the market down to, or nearly down to, zero.
is a special case which we shall discuss presently, and which accounts for the asymmetry in the power of Central Banks in booms and depressions.
A boom can always be broken by purely monetary means; a depression might need other measures.
As a rule Central Banks follow the changes in the market rates only with a substantial lag.
This lag is mainly caused by the inability of Central Banks to recognize the inflationary or deflationary character of the economic situation in time, and -in the case of inflation-also by the unpopularity of restrictivemonetary policies.
This, by the way, is in essence the idea underlying the business cycle theory.
His "natural" interest rate was, basically, the rate at which demand for and supply of credit are in balance without any interference from money-creating or money-destroying Central Banks.
According to his view, boom and inflation, depression and deflation, are caused-or at least made possible----by time lags in the adjustment of market rates to rising or declining natural rates.
He neverwent so far as to maintain that credit demand and credit supply balance only by chance without money deflation or inflation.
In short, Wicksell considered the so-called deflationary gaps, the interruption of the money flow from saver to borrower, as altogether abnormal.
To Wicksell, in contrast to Keynes, Say's law appeared valid in the general case and not only by accident.
Deliberate Maladjustments In some cases Central Banks deliberately fail to adjust the bank rate to the natural interest rate.
Most important .nowadays is the case of the permanent COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS cheap money policy, such as was practiced until very recently in the United States and Great Britain.
However, the cheap money policy as practiced for the last two decades was, if not the cause, then certainly the necessary condition for the strong inflations during that period, and thus much more costly than higher interest rates-at least for all those taxpayers who did not make inflation profits.
Budgetary Deficits and Surpluses, as such, do not Create 1nflation or Deflation Many people believe that budget deficits lead to inflation, budget surpluses to deflation.
A budget deficit creates credit demand on the part of the government, and thereby raises interest rates.
But inflation follows only if the Central Banks fail to raise the bank rate accordingly.
Thus, whether a budget deficit creates inflation or not depends entirely on the supply price for credits determined by the Central Banks, which, it is true, is often dictated by the governments wishing to raise funds.
If the g9vernment uses the surplus to repay its debts, supply on the credit markets increases and interest rates fall.
Otherwise the increased credit supply is absorbed by credit demand without deflationary consequences.
Budget surpluses may even coincide with inflation) when the increase in credit demand from the private sector of the economy exceeds the increase in credit supply due to the repayment of government debts.
Unless the Central Bank: then raises its discount rate and lowers the price at which it is prepared to buy government bonds inflation will ensue.
Death T"aps Open when the Credit Demand is Extremely Weak Even if the Central Banks do keep the discount rates adjusted to the market rate, the large death traps will open whenever cr~dit demand declines to such an extent that even at extremely low interest rates part of the credit supply is no longer absorbed by demand.
If credit cannot be cheapened any further, it is clearly impossible to bring about inflation, or, as it is often said, reflation, by means of discount policy.
All that can be done then is to unbalance the budget and thereby create credit demand by the government.
Cyclical Deflation Deflation due to deficient credit demand is characteristic of the depression phase of the business cycle.
The cause of excess supply on credit markets during depressions is a combination of strongly declining demand for investable funds, due to entrepreneurs' reluctance to invest, and of strongly increasing supply of such funds, due to consumers' reluctance to spend.
This is why Keynesians-and many economists before them-try to explain crises and depressions by over-saving.
But this explanation cannot be satisfactory, at least not when saving is understood in the usual sense of the word as the expression of the wish to provide for the future by curtailing present consumption.
If it were true that saving in this sense is responsible for depressions, interest rates would begin to fall slowly at the end of the boom, for saving habits do not change suddenly at the upper turning point of the business cycle.
What creates excess supply and deficient demand on credit markets is something else: it is the more or less simultaneous reluctance of consumers to consume and of entrepreneurs to COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS invest.
This double reluctance is essentially due to waning confidence in the demand and price structure.
Keynes and many of his followers lump both kinds of abstinence from consumption together under the expression "lacking propensity to consume."
We shall deal with the phenomenon of cycles later in detail.
It suffices here to emphasize that the existence of cyclical depressions does not invalidate our basic proposition that changes in the propensity to save do not lead to inflation or deflation, to the appearance and disappearance of money in and out of circulation.
credit supply and credit demand leading to deflation is impossible, is contrary to the so-called stagnation theory of Keynes and certain of his followers.
According to that theory permanent, non-reversible, deflation is not only possible but indeed probable in the not too distant future.
The argument runs roughly along these lines: while the communities become richer, both the amount of annual saving and the saturation of the economy with capital are bound to reach a point where there is no further investment opportunity for additional savings.
Every entrepreneur knows that he would be able to improve the productivity of his enterprise by using ever more capital.
So far as Europe.
with its lack of capital is concerned, the idea that un~mploymentshould essen- tially be due to investment lagging behind saving seems-in Professor Adolf Weber's words-just a bad joke.
This does not mean that credit demand can never be deficient in the long run.
Wages and taxes may be raised to such a high level that additional investment _might, indeed, appear unprofitable.
Then the demand curve may reach such a low point that part of the supply of credit is no longer absorbed.
Many Keynesians advocate ever higher wages and ever more progressive income taxes with a view of redistributing income to the advantage of those with a higher propensity to consume.
To the extent that this advice is followed, stagnation may indeed take place-but only because Keynesians have themselves created the conditions in which their theory, as such incorrect, would become valid.
Checking Accounts and Cash So far, we have dealt only with money, in the sense mainly of banknotes and currency.
We now turn to the so-called money substitutes-mainly demand deposits with banks,from which payments are ordinarily made by check.
Checking accounts may simply be created because the owners of funds consider an account more convenient than cash and, therefore, pay their money into checking accounts.
increases the quantity of money, unless other checking or deposit accounts are simultaneously immobilized-consolidated..:..-by repayment of credits or by abstinence from spending, Le.
In all these cases the creation of bank money for the purpose of granting credits obviously involves inflation just as does the issue of money by the Central Banks; inversely, the destruction of bank money through repayment of credits involves deflation just as does the retirement of banknotes by the Central Banks.
Economic literature has extensively dealt with the question whether, for these reasons, the power of Central Banks in preventing inflation and deflation is not a very limited one.
They advocate, therefore, a hundred per cent coverage of demand deposits with the banks by deposits of the bank with Central Banks, in order to strengthen the control of the Central Banks over the money circulation.
Whether payments are made by check, banknotes or paper money, the responsibility of Central Banks for the volume of money circulation remains the same.
By supplying the necessary amounts of cash the Central Banks govern, so to speak, the whole pyramid of credit erected by the banks.
In order that the banks can grant credits in the amount of x, Central Banks have to issue a certain fraction of x in banknotes.
Nor are the Central Banks .powerless with respect to an increase in the velocity of the circulation of bank money following changes in the spending policy of consumers, described later, pp.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION In order that the velocity of circulation of bank money can increase by x per cent, Central Banks have to issue a certain fraction of x in new banknotes, to allow for a greater turnover per unit of time.
But the protection against this contingency is not a full coverage of bank money through deposits with Central Banks, but a reduction of the note issue.
Where, as in the United States, commercial banks have to cover a certain percentage of their demand deposits by accounts with the Central Banks, these have-by raising the so-called reserve requirements and hardening the conditions under which they can be acquired-a direct and.
immediate influence on the creation of bank money.
Circular Flow and Sequence Analysis of the Effects of Inflation and Deflation The effects of inflation and deflation are not easily described.
of inflation has effects in the current production period quite different from those in more distant periods.
Its as it were, retroactive effects on the products of past periods, namely on their prices, are again quite different.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS This is why the so-called circular analysis, preferred nowadays by many economists under the influence of Keynes' General Theory which mostly uses this method, can only lead to unrealistic results.
What happens on Saturday-for instance saving-must indeed then be considered to have influenced retroactively what has happened the previous Monday in the sphere of production and employment.
As a result, neither the real causes of unemployment nor the real effects of insufficient consumption are correctly described or explained and one forgets that, in order to spend, one has first to earn.
Effects of Inflation and Deflation on the Capital Structure The effects of inflationary credits are, in many respects, different from those of non-inflationary credits.
But the consequences on the capital structure are the same.
What is decisive for the effects on the capital structure is not the nature of the supply, but the nature of the demand for credits.
If the additional purchasing power created by inflationary credits is directed towards consumption goods, as happens in war-time, production or consumption detours become shorter on the average.
If, on the other hand, the additional credits are used for purposes of production-as they are in times of normal cyclical prosperity-all those effects will be created which have been described in Part II as the effects of increased use of capital.
Production will be directed into longer production detours, the capitalistic structure of the economy will be deepened.
It makes no difference whether the credits are granted with money created ad hoc by .Central Banks or private banks, or with money reaching the banks through genuine saving.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Effects of Inflation and Deflation on Employment The effects of inflationary credits 'are not limited to lengthening production detours.
Since the additional supply of inflationary credits lowers interest rates not only more capital but also more labor can be used.
Employment increases because, the lower loan costs of capital allow the employment of submarginal workers.
As the supply curve of capital moves downward, so the demand curve for labor moves upward.
It is important to note that if-but only if-no changes in the supply price of factors of production, especially labor and capital, occur simultaneously with credit inflation the latter's effects on capital structure as well as on employment are lasting.
Nor need the situation deteriorate again in the next production period, always assuming the supply prices of production factors remain unchanged.
Generally, by the next production period, the factors of production will react to the higher price level-which is the main consequence of inflation-by raising their supply prices.
This is the chief reason why the Keynesian ,demand theory of employment, according to which employment is a function of monetary demand, is unacceptable to neo-classical economists.
If entrepreneurs borrow money, there must be people who save money.
The problem of how saving and investment can at the same time balance and not balance has been discussed at great length in literature.
The problem, lile so many in modern economics, is, however, only an apparent one.
Obviously saving and investment are not equal in so far as they balance only if and when the banks have expanded or contracted their credits by inflation or deflation.
When the banks grant credits having no counterpart in simultaneous saving, they simply create new savings, as surely as the new debtors in the balance sheets of banks must be matched by new creditors, and the new bills in the balance sheet of Central Banks by new banknote liabilities.
The Banks and the Central Banks are the Savers Who are the new savers?
If the banknotes issued by the Central Banks and the checking accounts created by the private banks were real liabilities, the answer would be somewhat complicated.
As long as the banknotes circulate and the checking accounts are used for payments, they are liabilities of the banks only in a formal sense, 'but in reality capital the banks created, so to speak, out of nothing.
They could'figure on the right-hand side of the banks' balance sheets as capital rather' than as debts, as long as the above conditions are fulfilled.
If this is correct, then the moneycreating institutions themselves can be considered as the savers of the money that has been lent to entrepreneurs.
By this is meant that the consumption of the holders of old money is curtailed through rising prices, in favor of those competing on the markets with new money.
While such a curtailment of consumption by holders of old money happens, indeed, it is entirely misleading to describe this process 'as forced saving.
It would be more correctly described THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION as forced restriction of consumption, for the holders of old money do not emerge with more money or other assets, as they should do if they had saved.
Money in the wider sense will disappear from circulation, but at the same time the quasi-capital of the banks and of the Central Banks, which was created by the earlier granting of credits, will be destroyed.
Forced restrictions of consumption are the reasons why inflation can have a lasting effect on the capital structure.
Inflation and Deflation and the General Price Level The increased purchasing power created by credit expansion never buys the goods produced in the same period.
It is important to keep in mind that it buys the products of a former period, when production cannot yet have been influenced by inflation and when output can, therefore, not yet have increased.
The result is an increase in the prices of the products of the past period.
Why the general price level rises when new money is introduced into the economy is easy to understand.
Entrepreneurs.
use this money either directly for the purchase of capital goods and intermediate products, or to pay workers' wages.
In the latter case the money increases the demand on the markets for consumption goods.
In both cases the average demand curve for goods shifts to the right and cuts the supply curve at a higher point.
The function of the higher price level is, of course, to curtail the demand until supply again equals demand.
The demand of the buyers owning the new, additional, money can only be COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS satisfied at the expense of the old buyers' demand.
This is a Gorrect description of the effects of money and credit inflation of the current period (Period II) on the prices of goods produced in the past production period (Period I), in which inflation could not yet influence the volume of output.
In .practice, under certain exceptional circumstances, the current period's new money does not raise the price level of both capital and consumer goods produced in the past .period.
When inventories have accumulated during a depression because of the sellers' unwillingness to sell at the market (at any price), the higher demand can for some time be met out of stock.
To this extent the higher demand leads to increased sales rather.
We shall deal with such cases of price rigidity later, when describing the mechanism of the business cycle.
The Demand for Products of the Current Production Period The effect of inflation on the prices of goods produced in the current production period (Period II) is much more complicated, because now not only the demand for, but also the supply of goods increases.
is obviously dependent on the amounts entrepreneurs will be prepared to spend on production in the next, the future, production period (Period III)-just as the demand for the goods produced in the past period (Period I) was dependent on the amounts entrepreneurs were prepared to spend in the current production period (Period II).
The demand for the goods produced in the present thus depends on how much entrepreneurs decide to spend in the future on capital goods, intermediate goods and wages.
But, on the average, the price expectations of entrepreneurs will be higher than at the time of the production decisions for Period II.
As long as entrepreneurs have to pay only the former wages and interest, the margin between outlays and expected revenues-and thereby their profit expectationswill increase.
This, again, means that the demand for credits with which to pay for capital goods, intermediate goods and wages rises in Period III, just as in the.
case of an increase in the productivity of capital for reasons of new inventions (treated above on p. 81).
Unless the additional credit demand is checked at this stage by a rise in discount and interest rates, there will be a second inflation in Period III. The demand for the products of the current Period (II) during Period III will therefore be higher than the demand for the products of Period I during Period II.
The Supply of Products of the Current Period However, the supply of goods produced in the current Period (II), too, is higher than it was at the end of Period I.
Supply adjusts to demand even though with a time lag, pro~ vided the supply schedule of labor remains stable, as we assume as a first approximation to reality.
To do so they will compete for labor with the result that wages go up.
The higher wages draw more workers into production.
The extent of the, increase clearly depends on how many additional workers are available at higher wages-in other words, on the elasticity of the labor supply.
If the labor supply is elastic, the COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS increase in employment and production is substantial.
If it is inelastic, meaning that hardly any additional workers are available at the higher wage level, the increase in employment and production will be negligible.
In this case the additional credits will increase only the use of capital but no longer the employment of labor.
The Price Level for Products of the Current Period The price level for products of the current Period (II) is determined by the demand emanating from the purchasing power created in Period III, and by the supply of goods produced in the current Period (II).
Both have increased: the future demand through the second injection of inflationary money, and the supply-with a time lag-because depending on the elasticity of the labor supply entrepreneurs produce more in the current Period (II) than they did in Period I.
At the end of the current period the price level will receive a further lift through the inflation of Period III.
For meanwhile the lagging effects of the first inflation on the production of Period II are felt-the more so the more elastic the labor supply has proved.
long as, labor supply is perfectly elastic the lift will be negligible, because the additional increase in demand will be matched by higher supply; if it is quite inelastic the lift will be strong, because supply fails to increase.
If the elasticity of labor supply is somewhere in betwe~n, the new money will-as is often said-be spent partly on higher prices and partly on a larger product.
Production can be increased in the current period only when it starts from scratch in that period.
A steam hammer cannot be produced in the current period to be sold at its end, because it takes many periods to build it.
This does not mean, however, that the prices of capital goods taking time to construct must at the end of the current period rise far above their THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION production costs.
Plans for the use of such capital goods reckon generally with long construction periods.
The immediate adjustment of the economy to inflation is also often prevent~d by the fact that the amount of fixed capital cannot be increased as quickly as the .amount of variable capital.
For this reason the optimum combination of fixed and variable capital can only be restored after some time.
In the transition period the amount of variable capital, especially the capital used for payment of wages and thus leading to increased employment, will only be increased to the extent to which the production advantages due to inflation outweigh the disadvantages caused by the unfavorable combination of fixed and variable capital.
that the supply curve of labor runs horizontally at this wage level for a certain time.
Most of the so-called growth theories, so popular nowadays, try to demonstrate-with the help of innumerable and mostly entirely speculative models-that a population growth, if not accompanied by a proportionate increase in the capital supply, is bound to lead to all sorts of difficulties in the economic development, both short and long run.
In general, an increase of the capital supply by the banks is, therefore, considered a necessary and innoxious condition for unhampered growth, for no general price rises are anticipated from such an increase.
To prevent misunderstanding we wish first to emphasize that the problem of providing an adequate capital supply by inflationary credit expansion must not be confused with the question dealt with earlier (pp.
There we dealt COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS with capital-also capital supplied by genuine saving-that is newly used for paying the wages of an increased labor force.
Here new money must indeed be introduced into the system in order to avoid deflation of the whole price and wage structure.
In this case-which corresponds somewhat to the case of changing payment habits-an increase of the quantity of money by inflationary credit expansion has no influence on the general price level since the quantity of money appearing on the markets for goods in a certain period is not increased.
The satisfaction of a genuine "need for money"-to employ this so-often misused term-is atstake.
Growth theories, however, are not~at least not in the first place-concerned with this more or less technical problem.
They are concerned with the lack-or sometimes abundance -of capital necessary to absorb the new ~abor force into the productive process, the problem of need' for capital as distinct from the problem of need for money from which it has to bebut seldom is-clearly distinguished.
Without penetrating too far into the thicket of the growth theories the following might be remarked: Growth theories, mostly concerned with the consequences of a lack of capital offered, are the exact counterpart of the stagnation theories, concerned with the consequences of an excess of capital offered.
The former theories are nowadays, during the boom, as eagerly discussed as the latter were in the 1930s, after the great depression-a new proof of how quickly fashions in economics change and how economists are prone to overestimate the importance, in the long run, of a momentary situation.
Growth theories may turn out to be just as devoid of practical significance as the stagnation theories.
Most growth theories suffer from the fact that they assume certain data, for example wages, as fixed, whereas they should, for the purpose of analysis, be considered as flexible.
The assumption of inflexibility of wages diverts attention from the fact that the supply of labor is, via the price mechanism, adjustable to every capital supply situation, at least for the longer run.
idea of so to speak "natural" or "warranted" relationships between capital and THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION labor, assumptions which render the resulting theories useless for economic theory and policies in a world in which most data of an objective as well as of a psychological nature are exposed to permanent changes.
We shall have to raise the same objection when dealing with multiplicatorand ac.. celerator theories and their mechanistic assumptions.
As soon as one concedes that the rigidity of wages is not godsent, one recognizes that inflationary credit expansion is not the necessary and indisputable remedy for- discrepancies between labor and capital supply, but that one is dealing with a genuine dilemma: the pros and cons of an entirely inelastic money supply-and therefore the absence of any inflationary credit expansion---have to be set against the pros and cons of filling the alleged capital gap by inflationary credit expansion.
In order to come to a decision in this dilemma no special growth theories are needed.
principles developed in Part II, in which an economy with an inelastic money supply, and in the present one, in which an economy in inflation and deflation is examined, are completely sufficient.
75"""'77) that, given a certain capital, the effects of an increased labor supply are: increased production as a result .of increased employment, declining wages and increasing interest rates as a result of the distribu.. tion of the given .capital to equip an increased number of workers, and the consequent increased marginal productivity of capital.
The general price level remains stable, provided the deflationary effects of increased employment are counter.. acted through satisfying the money need just described.
The difficulties of overcoming in this way the discrepancies between growth of population and a fixed capital supply arise of course, in practice, from the rigidity of wages on the downside that is enforced by unions and is now already traditional.
If wages are not allowed to decline under the impact of increased labor supply, the increment in population will remain unemployed instead of being absorbed in the productive process.
If one wishes to avoid these consequences, wages must be COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS supported by applying more capital, and this can ceteris paribus be achieved only by inflationary credit expansion (going beyond the satisfaction of the technical money need mentioned).
More workers being employed, the increased amount of money would meet an increased quantity of products so that the new money, while not neutral in absolute terms, would at least be price neutral.
This argumentation is the result partly of confusing the problem of capital need with the problem of money need, and partly of thinking along the lines of a very rough form of quantity theory.
It contains a circular analytical error in that it forgets that the new money does not buy what will be produced by the newly engaged workers, but the products of the smaller labor force of a past period.
This can, of course, be achieved by preventing the rise of the interest rates in spite of the increased demand for capital, i.e.
by supplying the needed capital at the old rates by inflationary credit expansion.
They supply the capital needed to pay and equip the increased labor force and maintain its marginal productivity.
Economic policy has thus, obviously, to choose between the advantages of stabilizing wages and thus preventing unemployment, and stabilizing prices, thus preventing a rising price level and the originating of cumulative processes.
According to the economic and political situation of the moment, a middleof-the-road policy may be advisable which tries to keep THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION 127, unemployment as well as price rises within limits.
95 and 96) and would add here the following: If productivity increases-following technical progress or increased capital investments-within the framework of a totally inelastic money circulation, as presupposed in Part II, prices will of course sink because an increased production meets an unchanged monetary demand.
In this case the advantages of increased productivity are shared by all sections of the population, including recipients of rents and fixed salaries, and owners of monetary claims.
This method of coping with the problem of increased productivity has the disadvantage, as already mentioned, of inflicting losses on those who hold inventories and durable capital goods.
The consequences of such losses on the anticipationsof entrepreneurs should not be overrated, however.
Entrepreneurs are influenced in their decisions less by losses in the past than by anticipation of profits in the future.
As prices have not fallen more than costs they won't curtail production, except if they assume that productivity increase-and thus falling prices-are a permanently repeating phenomenon.
A much more important difficulty follows from the fact that labor leaders prefer to fight for a raising of money wages in accordance with increased productivity rather than for a lowering of consumer prices.
This is quite understandable, first, because when money wages are raised the increased productivity benefits only labor; second, because the success of unions appears much more impressive if wages are raised in monetary rather than in real terms.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS If entrepreneurs are induced to pay higher wages in accordance with increased productivity, the prices of the increased products have to be prevented from sinking, for if wages are pushed up in the face of sinking prices, unemployment must ensue.
The only way of supporting the price level is by increasing monetary demand through inflationary credit expansion.
This inflationary credit expansion, while supporting the price level, will, however, not raise it because the increased money circulation meets a supply of goods that has been increased through the higher productivity.
Such an "inflation without inflation"-which, incidentally, should not be confused with the "volume prosperity" which develops in the first phase of a business cycle, as described later (pp.
2 Those who consider an "inflation without inflation" to be harmless overlook the fact that productivity increases mean profit increases for the entrepreneurs as long as costs-for labor as well as for capital-are not fully raised accordingly.
It does not make any difference whether profits rise because prices rise or because costs decline by increase of productivity.
Cumulative processes to the upside break down sooner or later and are followed by depressions-as we shall see later when the business cycle is described-if only because every stimulus finally exhausts itself.
But by preventing them one will meet all the difficulties connected with a sinking price level and the drive for higher wages mentioned above.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Cumulative Effect of the Original Inflation The second money inflation (in Period III) is caused, as we have seen, by the fact that the first inflation (in the current Period II) lifted the prices of goods produced in the past (Period I).
Now the second inflation, in turn, lifts the prices for the goods produced in the current period, except in the case of completely elastic labor supply.
This new price level again induces entrepreneurs to expand production in Period IV and to seek additional credits for this purpose, provided the supply schedules of the production factors remain unchanged as we assume for the time being.
Entrepreneurs, experiencing for a protracted time that prices are higher at the end of each production period than they were at its beginning, will expect prices to rise again during the current period and will base their production decisions on these expectations.
In the latter case credit demand collapses, as we shall describe later in detail.
Inflation Profits are Mostly Apparent Profits Entrepreneurs selling at prices increased through inflation reap profits, so-called inflation profits.
These profits are generally unexpected and thus windfall profits.
profits been expected by all entrepreneurs, the effects of future inflation would already show up in the current period.
Prices could no longer rise between the present and the future.
The future inflation would be discounted in present markets.
The entrepreneur receives a COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS greater amount of money for his products than he expected and than he spent on factors of production.
In fact he may need even more, namely if inflation has made further progress between the receipt and the spending of the money.
The fact that most inflation profits are not real but only apparent is usually not recognized by tax and other laws until the depreciation of money has gone very far.
This can happen particularly at the beginning of the recovery phase of a typical business cycle.
in Deflation We need not describe in detail the, effects of deflation on prices, employment and production, as they are exactly opposite to the effects of inflation.
The deflated purchasing power of the current production period meets the, as yet, undiminished product of the past period.
The lower prices induce the entrepreneurs to curtail their credit demands, with the result that the prices for the products of the current period drop still lower.
These low prices, in turn, influence the decisions of entrepreneurs in the next period, and so on.
Wailing and Hurrying A human factor tends to complicate the effects of money and credit inflation on the price level even more.
The effects of money inflation on the price level are generally mild at the beginning, even if the labor supply is not very elastic, but become much stronger as inflation proceeds.
At the beginning of a war, for instance, governments spend huge amounts of money newly created by banks and Central Banks, yet prices remain fairly stable for quite a while.
There are good reasons for this peculiar behavior of prices.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Human beings have a natural inclination to consider the purchasing power of money as stable" until they finally awaken from this money illusion, as it has been called, and then consider rising prices (or falling prices, in the case of deflation) as normal.
When prices begin to rise under the impact of credits granted to some groups of entrepreneurs-or in wartime to the government-other buyers will for the time being withdraw from the markets for consumer as well as capital goods.
This happened regularly at the beginning of all the great European inflations.
This exception was due to the inflation-consciousness of the public that had just experienced the inflation of the second world war.
Now the pent-up demand of those.
The result will, of course, be that prices go up more than if only the current and the pent-up demand had to be satisfied.
As the entrepreneurs base their price expectations for the future in general on the prices of the products of the past, such ,hurrying must render them even more optimistic.
Their demand 'for credits will become still stronger.
This stronger demand will result in' still higher prices, and these, in turn, in still higher credit demand.
In other words, the phenomenon of hurrying reinforces the cumulative effects of inflation.
Unless checked in time by counter-measures, runaway inflation must end in the total destruction of the function of money to serve as means of payment.
Once people begin to understand the vicious circle of inflation, they will anticipate COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS infinitely high prices for the future.
Nobody will any longer sell goods or services against money.
When consumers and producers hoping for lower prices delay the purchase of consumer goods and capital goods, they deposit the money earmarked for these purposes with their banks, thus creating an additional, if usually only temporary, supply on the credit markets.
This quasi-saving, as we might call it, explains a well-known feature of the early phases of most inflations: the abundant supply on the free capital markets,which although itself due to inflation in turn curbs inflation.
If the credit supply curve is S(n) and the demand curve D, supply and demand for credits balance at an interest rate of 5 per cent without the help of inflationary credits.
are prepared to satisfy all credit demand at 3 per cent.
The same happens if the inflation is not due to greater or cheaper supply of credits by banks, but to a stronger demand THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION for credits.
Suppose entrepreneurs are expecting higher productivity of capital, or governments with unbalanced budgets require credits.
The higher demand is satisfied by inflationary credits, unless banks raise their discount rates with increasing demand.
But as the inflation again creates new quasi-savi~gs, the higher demand is ultimately at least partly satisfied by the public~s quasi-savings rather than by inflationary bank .credits.
S(n2) Interest rates S% 1 - - - - - - - - 1 - - - : > .
phenomenon is simply the result of the power of inflation to create savings, because of people's inability to grasp quickly.the full implications of inflation.
Following such quasi-dissaving, by which funds are withdrawn from capital and money markets, interest rates go upas can indeed be observed in the latter phases of inflation, particularly of inflationary booms.
Contrary to Keynesian views, over-saving can therefore not explain why prosperity turns into depression.
The resulting monetary changes are often referred to as changes in the velocity of the money turnover.
Many controversies created by this interpretation could be avoided by speaking-much more realistically-of changes in the quantity of money rather than in its velocity of turnover.
If people withdraw cash from bank accounts in January which formerly was withdrawn only in February, then the quantity of money in the hands of the public in January is increased, but the individual banknote need not change hands more often than previously-say once a month.
If, in January, people draw checks on accounts which formerly were immobilized until February as quasi-savings, the quantity of bank money is increased in January and that of quasisavings accounts diminished; the checking accounts as such need not necessarily be turned over any quicker than  THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION .
We can therefore int~rpret a premature turnover of cash or checking accounts as an increase, and a delayed turnover as a decrease, in the volume of money.
As mentioned earlier (p. 107), some people do not deposit with their banks the money not needed for the time being.
If these people begin to wait, or indeed to save genuinely, the quantity of money in the hands of the public does not decrease, though it is temporarily withdrawn from circulation.
And if these people hurry or dissave, the quantity of money in the hands of the public does not increase.
increase and decrease in the velocity of money turnover.
At the same time, the quantity of money remains the same.
While the effects of unofficial and official inflation on the price level are the same, the effects on the supply of credit are quite different.
If money.
If the money disappears into private hoards, no such effect follows.
In the opposite case, if money is withdrawn from the banks through quasi-dissaving, the credit supply is curtailed.
No such effect follows the reappearance of money out of private hoards.
In so far as waiting and hurrying alter the velocity of money turnover, they also account for a further well-known phenomenon observed during all great inflations: at first the price level increases more slowly than the quantity of money issued by the Central Banks-the official money inflation; in the later phases the price level increases more quickly.
Whereas money is in general dishoarded-and the velocity of money turnover thereby increased-in the later stages of inflation, the contrary may happen in the special cases of money and credit crises.
If people begin to lose confidence in the banks, they fail to deposit the money temporarily not COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS needed and keep it in their own safe instead.
But this kind of deflation is most unlikely to occur again in the future.
Governments, anxious to avoid money crises, are sure to replace the hoarded money in one way or the other.
In the subsequent hurrying period of inflation, the inventory situation is, of course, reversed. Inventories increase with the expectation of higher prices, until finally they are so swollen that they alone can account for the ensuing slump.
Credit Demand in Deflation is Enhanced by Waiting and Curtailed by Hurrying of Sellers We speak of money deflation if banks and Central Banks restrict their lending so that bank money and currency are destroyed or withdrawn from circulation.
Deflation can be due either to reduced credit demand of entrepreneurs, or to a reduced or dearer credit supply by banks.
In both cases demand and supply on the credit markets will balance with less than-or altogether without-the credits formerly created by banks.
At the same time, however, production in many fields continues as before -partly because producers, too, consider the pricefall as only temporary or because they cannot or do not want to close down and dismiss their workers.
This circumstance creates an additional demand for credits to carry inventories over to the next recovery period; in the German literature these were called Durchhaltekredite.
This demand for carry-over credits counteracts the contraction of the volume of money and of credit.
The latter are to some extent replaced by carry-over creditsthe difference being that now goods no longer pass into the hands of those who in the normal course of events would have bought them for further processing, or as distributors and consumers, but remain in the hands of entrepreneurs at earlier production and trading stages.
On the credit markets interest rates hardly recede in spite of a decrease in the demand for regular credits.
Should the banks, in order to protect their own liquidity, be unable or unwilling to grant carry-over credits, Le.
to replace regular by carry-over credits, supply on the credit markets may become so scarce as to give rise to a real credit crisis.
The demand for carry-over credits dwindles, interest rates fall, and so do prices on the commodity markets.
In the later stages of deflation, the waiting of buyers expecting a price fall may accentuate the easing of the credit situation brought about by the liquidation of carry-over credits.
The ensuing demand for carry-over credits may be so strong that interest rates rise in spite of higher credit supply from quasi-saving.
However, in times of inflation this happens-not because of the Keynesian psychological law, according to which an increase in the living standard leads to an increase in the savings rate, but because inflation leads to a redistribution of income in favor of higher, and at the expense of lower income groups.
The lower incomes of workers and employees are reduced in real terms because they rise slower than prices.
Similarly the owners of bonds and savings accounts, pensioners and so on, on the average less wealthy, suffer losses through inflation -whereas entrepreneurs, on the average richer, make profits if they have contracted debts in good money.
Since the rich generally save more than the poor, the result of the redistribution of income must be an increase in the savings rate-at least as long as the public's inflation-consciousness does not destroy its propensity to save.
Falling prices mean that the real incomes of workers and employeesas long as they are still employed-grow; at the same time entrepreneurs generally suffer heavily.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION But the spending habits of the population during inflation and deflation are probably much more affected by waiting and hurrying than by redistribution of income.
The effects of investment on consumption are dealt with by the multiplief theory, the effects of consumption on investments by the acceleration principle.
In view of the great importance for theory and practice generally attributed to these concepts we shall examine them a little closer.
It is, of course, undeniable that investment and consumption are related.
Nevertheless, the ratio of investment to consumption can vary, because it clearly depends on the length of the production detours.
In an economy with longer average production detours a greater part of the product will, at anyone moment, consist of capital goods than in an economy with shorter average production detours.
.Accordingly the amounts spent at the beginning of any production period on capital goods will be greater in the former than in the latter...
The lengths of production detours are, however, not fixed once and for all.
They are determined by the productivity of capital and the interest rate.
If more is spent on consumption, entrepreneurs wishing to produce more consumer goods will, it is true, wish to acquire the capital goods necessary to produce the consumer goods in the same capitalistic way.
If it is not elastic, entrepreneurs will have to produce the greater amount COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS of consumer goods in a less capitalistic way.
II III IV V VI VII Short production detours Percentage of spending on capital goods to total spending: 50 per cent.
Long production detours Percentage of spending on capital goods to total spending: 75 per cent.
I D Spending on consumer goods Spending on capital goods FIG.
21 If more is spent on investment, the incomes of those who have contributed to the production of the investment goods will rise.
More investment, so far as it can take place at all, will not lead to more but to less simultaneous consumptioncontrary to the reasoning of the multiplier theory.
Thus the multiplying and accelerating effects-the stimulating effect of investment on consumption and of consumption on investment-can at best take place only to the extent that Central Banks fail to defend the .
Multiplier and acceleration theories appear, therefore, to be valid only in an economy in which credit supply is highly elastic owing to easy money policy.
Foran economy which avoids inflation and deflation it remains true that more spending on investment leads not to more, but to less spending on consumption; and that more spending on consumption leads not to more, but to less spending on investment.
Even for an economy with elastic money supply the concepts of multiplier and accelerator are subject to considerable objections, theoretical as well as practica1.
The very designations of both theories are misleading.
overproportional, increase in the aggregate expenditure of one period only if all the required intermediate products were produced in that same production period.
Not only the production marked black in Figure 21, but all preceding intermediate productions too, marked white, must take place simultaneously.
For both technical and logical reasons we must assume that, when consumption increases, production of capita!
goods starts in the first production period,but reaches later stages of maturity only in later periods.
Correct and self-evident is that the expectation of higher demand or prices for consumer goods will spread to COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS intermediate goods.'
The accelerator is thus at best a generalizator of improved price or demand expectations.
But whether these improvements lead via higher credits to a concentrated higher effective demand for labor, raw materials and intermediate goods depends-quite apart from the technical consideration mentioned-as with every expansion of production, on price-cost relationships and thus especially on the elasticities of capital and labor supply.
If price-cost relationships have become favorable, production expands, but this is not achieved through the working of an accelerator; it is in accordance with the general principle that production expands if expected prices go up more than costs.
The designation multiplier theory would be correct only if investment expenditures multiplied consumption expenditure in the same production period-as indeed circular flow analysis sometimes seems to suggest.
The further effects of increased investment spending can at best be felt in subsequent periods.
But the combined increase of incomes of later, future periods cannot be regarded as the multiplication result of the increased income of one period, just as the combined income of several periods together cannot be regarded as the multiplication result of the income of one period.
expenditure can, at best, add once for all a certain amount to the income of each period.
For practical purposesthe designation multiplier has to be rejected because it leads to an enormous overrating of the beneficial effects of public investment.
According to the older theories the amounts spent on investments and consumption in any future production period are dependent on all the data of the future, as well as on the psychological reactions of people to these data.
Multiplier and acceleration types of analysis treat all these other data-under the heading propensity to consume or to invest-as given and constant or THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION decreasing in the same proportion, and the amounts of original spending on investment and consumption as the variables of the system.
And if, as a concession to reality, this is conceded then only the self-evident trivial statement remains that money received is sometimes spent and sometimes not.
Consumer and investment spending depend on many considerations other than whether entrepreneurs, through the additional spending of consumers, and consumers, through the additional spending of entrepreneurs, have received money.
If the price-cost relationships do not appear favorable, entrepreneurs will desist from buying services and capital goods regardless of whether consumers have previously spent money on consumer goods.
The correctness of this view was amply proved when in the first New Deal period the money spent by the government failed to create any additional demand, but simply disappeared in the banks.
It is the propensity to consume or to invest which in reality is the important variable of the system.
The proper task for theory is to examine the changes and their reasons in this propensity rather than to treat it as given and constant, as the multiplier and acceleration theories do.
Theory has to investigate whether and to what extent consumers spend in subsequent periods the purchasing power they have received through previous investment expenditure; and whether and to what extent entrepreneurs invest in subsequent periods what they have received through previous consumption spending.
Analytical work resting on multiplier and acceleration theories is guilty of a petitio principii.
It presupposes precisely COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS what really is in question: the spending in the future of money spent in the present.
It is unnecessary to stress again that any accelerating or multiplying effects will be real only under the assumptions to be mentioned immediately.
Compensating Reactions of Factors of Production In everything said so far about the effects of inflation and deflation we have assumed that neither capitalists nor workers react by raising their demands correspondingly to the higher prices caused by inflation.
It also provides a correct description of what can happen during short transition periods.
However, it is entirely misleading if used to describe the lasting effects of inflation and deflation.
It is the chief mistake of the Keynesians to have taken the short-term transitory effects of inflation and deflation as basis for a general equilibrium theory.
The assumption that the demands of production factors remain stable in monetary terms even when the purchasing power of money alters, is unrealistic.
It is hard to see why entrepreneurs, when engaging new workers, should take the changing price level into account, whereas on the other side the workers should not do likewise when offering their services.
According to Keynes, it is just such a divergence that enables new workers to be employed.
But labor leaders and their economic advisers are not as stupid as Keynes believes when he states that "the supply of labor is not a function of real wages."
It is difficult to understand why this statement, instead of being greeted with deserved derision, was until recently accepted as gospel truth.
What happens when the factors of production, by compensating reactions, adjust their monetary demands to the real changes in the value of money?
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Compensating Reactions of Creditors Suppose prices have risen by 2 per cent during the last period.
As soon as creditors no longer expect a reaction of prices but rather a continuation of their upward trend, they will raise their demands for interest on capital by 2 per cent, so as to be compensated for the loss of purchasing power.
expected during the lending period.
The supply curve of credits will move upward.
If Central Banks, too, now raise the discount rates by 2 per cent, further inflation will be prevented.
The demand curve for credits moves up, but so will the supply curve, and credits will not increase.
But if, as usual, the Central Banks do not raise their discount rate in spite of mounting demand for credits, the moneycreating banks will expand their lending to meet the increased inflationary demand.
At the same time those private creditors who are inflation-conscious will recall outstanding loans in order to invest their money themselves in goods expected to protect against inflation losses.
The supply of non-inflationary credit is thus curtailed and demand has to be increasingly satisfied through inflationary credits.
Thus' the compensating reactions of private capitalists' lend new impetus to the inflation.
Private creditors either went on strike' or demanded exorbitant interest rates, whereas the Reichsbank, failing to grasp what was happening, stuck to its low discount rates.
The runaway inflation of that period was chiefly the result of these circumstances.
As a rule, therefore, the margin between costs and prices COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS described above 3 will fail to materialize.
Employment and production will not increase, and inflation will spend itself entirely on higher prices and not on higher employment and production.
According to their so-called quantity theory of money, after a brief transition period during which supply prices are adjusted to the increased monetary demand, a greater volume of money simply raises prices correspondingly.
Wages were automatically adjusted to any increase in the prices of goods.
~Employment even decreased when labor finally succeeded in raising real wages, which had lagged behind the depreciation of money during the whole inflation period.
The so-called escalator clauses, common in many labor contracts nowadays in the United States, practically rule out any employment-increasing effects of inflation.
Thus the Keynesian employment theory is no longer valid even in transition periods.
When dealing in Part IV with the special case of inflation and deflation called the business cycle, we.
correct, union leaders rather than the Central Banks would See p. 117.
In general, wage increases lower the marginal productivity and yield of capital: They have, therefore, a deflationary effect -unless we assume that cost increases cause price increases.
Cost increases, as such, do not raise the prices of the products, because the increasing costs can be .shifted on to the consumers only if money inflation has meanwhile progressed further.
If entrepreneurs-though perhaps mistakenly-expect the higher costs to be shiftable on to the consumers, they will indeed anticipate higher prices for the future.
In times of depressions, therefore, the Keynesian thesis according to which labor sticks to its money wages in spite of a changing price level does hold.
Wage rigidities downward explain why unemployment increases in times of deflation and why it was so persistent during the Great Depression.
The contention of many labor leaders and their economic advisers that in depressions, when costs are in any case too high in terms of prices,wages should be raised in order to sustain demand is, therefore, nonsensical.
It is nothing else but a replica of the often refuted purchasing power theory of which Professor, Hansen, before he became a Hansenian, stated: It is, therefore, .not surprising that the theory should become widespread that higher wages are the cure for the restricted market and declining price level of the last decade.
This theory is accepted, one might almost say, by nearly every one in the COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS United States, not only by trade union leaders but also by leading business men, politicians, and journalistic economists.
During the 1930 depression leaders of American public opinion in all walks of life were constantly urging that the surest basis for a revival of prosperity was a maintenance of wages or even an increase in wages.
4 You cannot raise the general level of prices by the simple process of raising wages.
5 We shall not succeed in solving the depression through the soothing and agreeable device of inflation.
6 As the purchasing power theory has again come to be honored, although under another heading and in somewhat refined form, the following may be said.
It can be conceded that wage increases can, but do not necessarily, increase aggregate demand by shifting income from those of low propensity to consume (entrepreneurs, capitalists) to those of high propensity to consume.
This is why the purchasing power theory-by which, incidentally, every wage increase could be rationalized-has always been popular with laymen, and not only with those of socialist leaning.
First comes the entrepreneur's decision to create income by engaging production factors, then comes the spending or saving.
And under the prevailing price level wage increases must seem intolerable and lead to curtailing production.
For the assumption of a perfectly or almost perfectly inelastic demand curve for labor is entirely unrealistic.
Entrepreneurs will not pay any price for a given amount of work.
Only for additional work are additional payments 4 Alvin Harvey Hansen, Economic Stabilization in an Unbalanced World, New York, 1932, p. 279.
This is, incidentally, why.the recipe of the purchasing power theoreticians to raise wages during depressions~if not enforced by governmentsis .never carried out in practice.
The individual entrepreneur does not feel able to grant higher wages and just does .not do it.
But suppose, for argument's sake, the entrepreneurs were Keynesiansand would anticipate that products of the past period-and also of the current period-would meet a demand or price 'increase resulting from the shift of income from the savers to the spenders.
and not expand production.
For the increase in demand or prices must always be smaller than the increase in costs.
Even entrepreneurs and capitalistswhose income declines through the wage increases-had spent a part of what is now taken away from them.. Only if we assume that entrepreneurs pay higher wages immediately but curtail production only after some time could prices of or a demand for the products of the last period increase.
But 'quite apart from the fact that it seems quite arbitrary to assume that entrepreneurs would react promptly to price increases but not to cost increases, entrepreneurs would shortly after realize that price increases are not sufficient to cover cost increases and would curtail production.
With the prevailing price level in mind, entrepreneurs will expand production because of the cost saving through wage lowering.
But let us again assume they were Keynesians and would expect the aggregate demand to sink under the impact of the shift of income from the spenders to the savers.
Again they would have to realize, too, that aggregate demand would sink less than aggregate costs.
Thus entrepreneurs would expand production.
COMMON SE'NSE ECONOMICS Again, only if we assume, as is often done, that entrepreneurs would immediately lower wages but expand production only with substantial lags, could a deflationary effect on prices and demand for the products of the last period be expected.
But again, quite apart from the arbitrariness of the assumption, entrepreneurs would react shortly after to the still-improved price-cost relation and expand production.
All depends on what the entrepreneurs expect the effect of wage lowering to be on the demand and price situation-which again depends on whether they believe that production in further production periods, which produces the income to buy the products of the current period, will increase sufficiently so that the addition to total income will at least compensate the demand deficit resulting from the income shifts from the spenders to the savers.
Whether entrepreneurs on the average understand the economics involved or not, they will undoubtedly take an optimistic view so that even the transitory effects on entrepreneur psychology envisaged by Keynesians will not materialize.
If tomorrow the rumor were spread at the United States stock and commodity markets that unions had agreed to a general lowering of wages by 10 or 20 per cent, a huge buying spree on all markets and a rush to invest would set in, in which everybody would participate except inveterate Keynesians.
It is correct that, under certain conditions, the price level should be supported during depressions.
support is not only price support but also-and even more--cost support, and is therefore entirely contra-indicated as a means of price support.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION The End of Inflation Inflation stops when the Central Banks raise their discount rate to a level at which the inflation profits expected by entrepreneurs appear compensated by the higher cost of credit.
higher prices, the characteristics of the later stages of inflation, dwindle and the demand for credit declines.
If Central Banks were smart enough to lower their discount rates at once and to such an extent that the decrease in expected profits appeared to be immediately compensated, deflation would not be induced from the money side.
no longer accepting money as payment.
Such repudiation of money leads to total destruction of the value of money.
Credit demand no longer expands, and the vicious circle of inflation is interrupted.
We shalllater deal in detail with the mechanism of the so-called upper and lower turning points of business cycles.
Inflation is in the last analysis a sort of tax-and the most unjust of all-on income and capital~ levied on some members COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS of the economy in order to shift purchasing power to others.
These shifts in purchasing power succeed because, owing to the money illusion, some members of the community fail to recognize the change in the real value of money or cannot defend' themselves against such a change.
Therefore, inflation ends when the money illusion ceases to work.
When all the creditors-including the Central Banks-raise their demands for interest, when all wage earners raise their demands for wages, and when all owners of real estate raise their demands for rent in accordance.
with the existing or expected inflation, then there is no further inducement for additional credit demand.
Whether an individual or a group profits or loses by inflation depends on the relative ability of individuals and groups to defend themselves against the inflation 'tax.
The Banks At first sight, banks and Central Banks would appear as the inflation profiteers par excellence.
new debtors with bank money created by themselves and on which they pay no, or only very little, interest.
They merely compensate for the money depreciation that is taking place.
The assets of the banks grow roughly in proportion to the money and credit inflation, but so does the price level.
Investment of the banks' own capital is generally not inflation-proof.
It consists in the main of loans to clients, who pay interest and repay capital in depreciated money.
The Hitler inflation, THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION for instance, ended with the currency reform of 1948, which treated banks so badly that many of them suffered considerable capital losses.
Earners.oj Wages, Salaries and Fixed Incomes All those receiving money incomes suffer from inflation.
However, the losses of the various groups and individuals differ widely.
Let us suppose that these groups finally succeed in adjusting their incomes to the money depreciation.
If everybody insists on being compensated through new inflation for the effects of simultaneous inflation, then obviously a vicious circle is set in motion which soon raises prices infinitely high.
Entrepreneurs Entrepreneurs having paid their production costs with uninflated money, but selling their products for inflated money, reap inflation profits.
These are windfall profits (seep.
Had the higher prices been generally expected, prices would have risen earlier, and not only following the money and credit expansion of the next period.
These windfall profits, however,are not necessarily profits COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS in real terms.
They may even represent real losses-namely if inflation makes further progress between receipt and respending of the money.
Strictly speaking, these are not really profits; rather they represent additional earnings on capital due to the increased employment of "really" cheaper labor and the resulting higher marginal productivity of capital.
Monopolists will generally be able to adjust their monopoly rents sooner or later-mostly very soon-to the decreasing purchasing power of money.
Debtors and Creditors The situation becomes even more complicated by the fact that most entrepreneurs do not employ only their own capital, but also loan capital or credits.
Unless the loan contracts provide for changes in the value of money during the lending period-and this is hardly ever the case-inflation creates real profits for the debtors and real losses for the creditors.
If loans are repaid with depreciated money, .less real purchasing power is returned to the creditor than he lent.
They stipulated that interest should be paid and capital repaid according to the diminished purchasing power of money as measured by some price index.
Stable money incomes grow in real terms.
Debtors suffer losses while money creditors make profits at the expense of the former.
They follow from what has been said about inflation profits and loss~s, Share Prices in Inflation Share prices fluctuate around a level determined by dividends .on the one hand, and by interest rates on the other.
In the short run they are determined not so much by current as by expectations of future dividends.
We shall return to this in Part V. Here we are concerned with the development of share prices in the long run.
Inflation must strongly influence share prices, since it influences both earnings and interest rates~ Profits due to Lagging Production Costs We have just mentioned the profits of entrepreneurs through lagging production costs, particularly wages.
Companies which are prevented by law or regulation from adjusting the prices of their products to monetary changes, can reap higher earnings only if and when the price ceilings are abolished.
Therefore, the shares of public utilities with fixed tariffs do not rise during inflation except in special circumstances, and then often very late.
Windfall Profits and Share Prices The windfall profits mentioned above are much more important for share price formation.
These windfall profits protect capital in times of 'inflation.
The rise in share prices due to windfall profits is not expected by the average investor, just as the windfall profits themselves are not expected.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS Corporate earnings consist at least partly of monopoly rents, in general quickly adjustable to the declining purchasing power of money.
This is another reason for stock market booms during inflation.
As a general rule, shares will protect the better against inflation the more the flexibility of prices of the products exceeds the flexibility of the compensation of the production factors.
The behavior of common shares depends, of course, also on whether and to what extent the individual companies are indebted to banks or have issued bonds or preferred shares.
by inflation, bonds, bank credits, and preferred shares give so-called leverage to earnings and thus also to the price of the common shares.
Interest Rates and Share Prices If the inflation is due to a fall in discount and interest rates, the rates at which dividends and the interests on long-term bonds are capitalized are altered.
The prices of shares and bonds will move up accordingly.
However, even if inflation is due to increased credit demand, and interest rates therefore do not fall, inflation influences stock prices decisively for the following reason.
used to keeping a certain percentage of its funds liquid, interest rates on the free money markets begin to decline.
As the public usually wishes to invest part of its funds, increased through inflation, in shares, the demand for them THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION increases.
The interest rates at which dividends are capitalized decline.
Thus an extremely high demand for capital.
market boom, and this even if earnings do not increase-for instance because of high war taxation.
If this happens, the effects of voluntary waiting are reinforced by involuntary waiting.
Rationing and price ceilings prevent part of the money in.
A strong stock exchange boom, which can be called the idle money boom, develops.
When price ceilings and rationing are abolished, the public withdraws the funds invested on the stock markets.
Although the pent-up demand for goods stimulates the economy, the stock exchange experiences what we could call an active money depression.
The end of the war boom on the New York Stock Exchange in1946 characteristically coincided with the end of rationing and price controls.
Hurrying and the Stock Market But even when price ceilings and rationing are not first introduced and later abolished, .stock markets are strongly influenced by the behavior of buyers.
As soon as waiting turns into hurrying in the further course of inflation, the quasisavings created through waiting are withdrawn from the capital markets in order.
to be spent on the commodity markets.
Interest rates on the free market must, therefore, have a tendency to rise, bond and share prices to fall.
If now the Central Banks maintain their discount rate-as they regularly do if the government needs inflationary credits -treasury and commercial bills formerly boughtby the banks and the public are offered to the Central Banks; as they have to buy them with newly created money, inflation is further stimulated.
Money markets become easier again and stock COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS prices rise sharply, unless capital flight is legal or possible.
In this case, share prices lag behind prices of foreign currencies.
The stock market soared in what was called at that time a catastrophe boom, and exchange rates reached astronomic heights.
Stock Prices in Deflation Declining corporate earnings during deflation depress stock prices, just as their rising during inflation pushed them up.
But deflation influences stock markets also from the money side.
If deflation is induced by higher discount rates, the capitalization factor for dividends and interests on bonds alters; bond and.
If deflation is induced by a diminishing credit demand, interest rates decline, thus supporting bond and share prices.
Should a demand for carry-over credits develop, interest rates will rise more in the first case, and decline less in the second.
Money and capital markets can become so tight through entrepreneurs' demand for carry-over credits that a real stock exchange crash may ensue.
Bonds and shares are dumped on the market to satisfy their urgent credit demand.
Later the demand for these credits dwindles because entrepreneurs begin to hurry with the liquidation of inventories.
First-class bonds and sometimes also certain shares begin to move up under the impact of accumulating idle funds and low interest rates-much to the astonishment of the public expecting still lower prices because "business is still so bad."
They are called business cycles.
Generally speaking, these common features are exactly those produced by money inflations and deflations.
For this reason so-called monetary business cycle theories regard the business cycle as a monetary phenomenon, expressing the idea that the prosperity phase of the cycle is caused, or at least necessarily accompanied, by.
expansion, and the depression phase by contraction, of money circulation.
Inflation and deflation result from changes in credit demand and supply, as described above in detail.
The inflationary prosperity phase and the deflationary depression phase of the cycle result from the same changes.
Second, the individual cycles exhibit if not the same then at least similar wavelengths; this fact is generally referred to as periodicity.
Third, as soon as one cycle is completed, a new one begins.
The individual cycles follow each other in certain rhythms like measures in a musical score; cycles are, therefore, also called rhythmical phenomena.
Contrarily the changes creating business cycle fluctuations do COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS not lead to new equilibria.
For endogenous reasons prosperity creates depression, and depression creates prosperity in eternal sequence.
The pendulum of economic activity does not come to rest but continues to swing, like a perpetuum mobile-or at least it has done so until now.
Why is the business cycle self-perpetuating?
Many economists have tried to solve this so-called riddle of the cycle, but no one answer has so far found general acceptance.
Maldistribution of Monetary Demand over Time During the prosperity phase demand for goods and services is far above and during the depression phase far below the intracyclical average level.
But over the whole of the cycle monetary demand does not dwindle and money does not disappear into death traps.
For the business cycle as a whole, therefore, Say's law remains valid.
The income of all factors of production is always sufficient-and is used-to buy all goods produced.
The cycle is characterized by a maldistribution of demand over the various phases of a cycle rather than deficiency of demand during the whole cycle.
What are the reasons for this maldistribution of monetary demand over time?
Under-consumption Theories The most popular answer to the question of why demand suddenly falls off at the end of a prosperity phase and remains low during depressions, is provided by the so-called underconsumption theories.
They are as old as the, business cycles themselves.
They were considered as definitely refuted until Keynes' unemployment theory-which is at least partly an under-consumption theory-made them fashionable again.
Under-consumption theories have been presented in the most various forms.
Underconsumption theoreticians consequently see the most important remedy against depressions in a redistribution of income in favor of lower brackets.
One economist, the "free money" man Silvio Gesell, even went so far as to propose the creation of a money with melting value, so as to discourage saving and thereby prevent aninterruption o the money flow.
It may be conceded that under-consumption might in certain conditions create deflation.
But under-consumption, or oversaving, can never lead to those phenomena which have been characteristic of business cycles in the past.
Furthermore, changes in saving are usually slow processes, whereas at the onset of a typical depression demand falls off abruptly and, so to speak, out of a clear sky.
Over-investment Theories The so-called over-investment theories try to explain depressions as a lack of new investment opportunities.
During the prosperity phase entrepreneurs expand their plants because they expect higher demand for their products.
But once the plants are constructed, the additional demand for goods and services created by their construction disappears.
Spiethoff explained the end of a boom in this manner long before the Keynesians developed their types of over-investment and stagnation theories.
Once the new capital goods-especially new industrial plants and equipment, and all installations for a long~term use, such as railways and electricity and water works-are operating, the production of consumer goods increases suddenly and excessively; demand can no longer absorb the supply of goods at prevailing prices.
It is, for instance, as we shall see later, by no means selfevident that the production of capital goods should expand by jerks rather than be spread evenly over time.
But more important: if additional capital is applied in an economy, the structure of the economy changes once and for all.
It becomes more capitalistic.
A new equilibrium with longer roundabout ways of production is established, provided no credit contraction is enforced by new developments.
At the beginning of every new production period entrepreneurs spend the same, now increased, amount of money on capital goods.
Therefore the demand for capital goods cannot suddenly fall off.
The funds required by entrepreneurs to maintain such demand are provided by the proceeds of the consumption goods sold, into which the capital goods of earlier period are, so to speak, amortized.
There is no reason why amortization and new production of capital goods should not balance.
The Theory of Unnatural Interest Rates The over-investment theories being entirely unsatisfactory, the Swedish economist, K. Wicksell, developed a theory according to which cyclical inflations and deflations are due to, or at least made possible by, fluctuations in credit supply.
For Wicksell and his followers the credit policy of the banks and Central Banks is primarily responsible for the business cycle.
Their theory runs roughly as follows.
If demand for credits picks up for one reason or another, the interest rates on the free markets-which appear as the natural rates to Wicksellhave a tendency to move up.
If the Central Banks, and with their support also the commercial banks, fail to adjust their interest rates and keep them unnaturally low, the increased demand for credit will partly be satisfied by the banks' inflationary credit expansion.
Later on, but too late, the Central Banks and consequently also the commercial banks raise their interest rates-either because they are losing gold or foreign exchange, or for other reasons.
Now demand for new credits is discouraged, and at the same time the credits granted earlier appear less profitable and are repaid.
In THE BUSINESS CYCLE 16~ other words: delay in adjustment of the bank rate to the increased credit demand opens the death trap for money with the result that the volume of money grows; the subsequent belated adjustment forces the money back into the death trap so that the volume of money shrinks.
His theory should be regarded as the most decisive progress in the field of economics.
Wicksell's reasoning might be contested for not stressing enough the importance of changes in credit demand.
In times of permanent cheap money policy, interest rates obviously cannot rise at the end of a boom, and therefore cannot be responsible for the turning of the tide.
The short but steep American depression of 1937 happened with interest rates moving hardly at all.
It was an "easy money depression."
But Wicksellian reasoning remains valid in so far as even the strongest demand for credits cannot lead to inflation if it is checked .in time by a restrictive interest and credit policy, i.e.
Psychological Business Cycle Theories Every business cycle consists of two distinct parts~an upswing and a downswing.
Each of these parts, in turn, is divided in two sections: during the latter section of the upswing and the first section of the downswing production exceeds, and during the latter section of the downswing and the first section of the upswing, production falls short of the intracyclical average.
If this were not so, any increase in credit demand or supply, for instance, would lead to a single and lasting credit and monetary expansion, but not first to inflation and then, as a reaction, to deflation.
Such forces, first strengthening the effects of certain changes only to damp them after a certain time, exist in economic and social life.
They go on paying and demanding higher I COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS prices, until one day the exaggerated price expectations break down.
Over-speculation must then be liquidated.
Psychological business cycle theories, for which the cycle is essentially the result of uncertainty, error and psychological epidemics, are not new.
Almost all contemporary descriptions of the cycles in the nineteenth century treat crises as the results of over-speculation of producers and consumers.
Mass optimism is regarded as responsible for the boom, mass pessimism for the depression.
After a lifetime of practical experience I am inclined to consider the psychological business cycle theories in combination with Wicksell's credit supply theory necessary as well as sufficient to solve the riddle of the cycle.
I do not, of course, deny that changes in objective data may start a cyclical movement.
Why does it lead to maldistribution over time rather than to a single and lasting change in the volume of consumption and production?
These facts can be explained naturally only by a psychological theory.
A brilliant exposition of such a psychological business cycle theory can be found in Professor A. C. Pigou's famous book, Industrial Fluctuations.
1 Psychological Cycle Theories are Realistic If business cycles are the result of a maldistribution of monetary demand over time-and there can be no doubt that they are-then they are in the last analysis nothing else than the expression of hurrying and waiting on a gigantic scale, embracing the whole economy.
Later, when dealing with stock market phenomena, we shall 1st edition, 1927; 2nd edition, 1929.
THE BUSINESS CYCLE examine in detail the mass psychological reasons for such hurrying and waiting.
Here it suffices to point out ,that the psychological theories are identical with the explanation of the cycle given by business men.
As far as I can see, only psychological theories can explain the suddenness and abruptness with which the boom ends in most cases.
Only they offer an explanation for what is really the riddle of the cycle: why the movements do not peter out but continuelike a perpetuum mobile.
Error about the Reversibility of Price Movements a Necessary Condition for the Cycle Even those who do not consider the fluctuations of the cycle .as caused mass psychologically must admit thatacertain mental attitude of the people, and especially of entrepreneurs, is a necessary condition for their happening.
Aberrations could not develop if people regarded the occurring changes in prices and demand as only temporary.
Nobody will invest, or even consume, .beyond his most urgent needs at rising prices_ if he expects prices to._ collapse during the period for which he is planning.
Nor will anybody sell at falling prices, except under compulsion, if he expects prices to recover later.
One of the main shortcomings of all non-psychological explanations of the cycle is not taking into account that maldistribution of demand over time cannot develop unless people are unaware of it.
Otherwise single erratic changes could develop, but never those periodical reversible and cyclical phenomena which have characterized the economies of industrial countries, at least until now.
forecast and calculate in advance the end of investment demand, and thus of the boom, must turn out to be false prophets, and most of them have indeed done so.
If economists can recognize the temporary COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS character of high demand, business men can, too.
For the world does not consist of economists who know and business men who err.
But when business men cease erring, they alter their plans.
They postpone certain investments and the calculated depression does not happen.
They buy at rising and sell at falling prices, although they realize the price movements to be short-term.
Their belief in the errors of others is a necessary condition for their short-term speculation.
Liquidity Preference not a Helpful Concept Since the appearance of Keynes' General Theory some economists have tried to explain the cycle through so-called liquidity preference.
2 It is true that business men at times refrain from spending and keep their money at home or in banks.
They also prefer short-term to long-term money claims.
According to the liquidity preference theory this is due to the business men's wish for protection against the uncertainty of the future.
However, business men in particular and the public in general preferring at times to be liquid, i.e.
to own money and short-term claims rather than capital or consumer goods or long-term claims, are not seeking special protection against the uncertainty of the future.
The future is always uncertain and not only at t~mes.
THE BUSINESS CYCLE If this is so, then it is unnecessary, misleading and alien to the whole system of our economic thinking to introduce the preference for liquidity, i.e.
for cash and short-term money claims, as a new and special reason why producers and consumers abstain at times from purchase.
Those who consider a preference for cash the reason for depressions are, therefore, guilty of a sort of double accounting.
The disinclination to own goods and the preference to own cash are taken as two separate phenomena, whereas they are really two sides of the same phenomenon: people prefer not to own goods because they fear the exchange rate of goods and money will move to the advantage of the latter.
Multiplier Theory, Acceleration Principle and Business Cycles Some economists believe that the riddle of the business cycle can be solved in terms of the acceleration principle and / or the multiplier theory.
The explanation of the business cycle in terms of the acceleration principle runs somewhat as .follows.
If consumption increases by an amount x, a multiple of x of capital goods must be produced, because production detours are, on the average, very long in a highly capitalistic economy.
But once the new capital goods are produced, the additional credit demand falls off.
As mentioned above, these arguments have to be refuted because they presuppose a highly elastic credit supply and a world in which the interest rate has lost its function to control the distribution of capital over time.
If they know that an increase in the annual production of automobiles requires only a single increase in automobile factories, they will certainly not construct steel mills with a capacity for an annually recurring increase in automobile factories.
Only in so far as entrepreneurs believe the rise in prices and demand of steel to be lasting will they act as assumed by the acceleration principle.
It is rather caused by entrepreneurs' faulty judgments about the duration of the price and the demand increases for capital.goods.
Many cycles of individual goods, such as the pig cycle, the construction cycle, and others, are caused simply by errors.
As regards the multiplier theory, a credit expansion for investment purposes results indeed in higher incomes of those contributing to the production of capital goods.
The problem of the cycle is just why at times these incomes are spent and why at other times they are withheld from the markets.
Unless the moneycreating institutions supply money at inflationary low interest rates no credit demand, however strong, could lead to THE BUSINESS CYCLE inflationary booms.
high interest rates, deflationary depressions could not normally develop.
Central Banks are responsible for every inflation, but not for every deflation.
If the demand for credits weakens to such an extent that interest rates on the free market sink to near zero without the .credit supply being absorbed by demand, then deflation develops, even if Central Banks and banks pursue.an extremely easy money policy.
We recall that outside of typically cyclical movements it can, happen only under very exceptional conditions, such as prohibitive taxation of production.
as will a structural decline in the propensity to invest due to changing productivity of capital.
Only the combination of a simultaneous decline in the propensity to consume and to invest, such as occurs in cyclical depressions as a result of general pessimism on prices and demand, can lead to such abundance of credit supply and such scarcity of credit demand that deflation ensues.
Keynesians are apt to lump together genuine saving and waiting due to pessimism on demand; they speak of both as a declining propensity to consume.
The Start of an Upswing A cyclical upward movement.can start theoretically and, as historical observation has shown, also practically in totally different ways.
Recovery can start from an easing of the money situation.
The volume of credit and money begins to rise.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS Recovery may also start from changed conditions on the side of demand for credits.
A new invention enhancing the productivity of capital will increase the demand for credits and hence the volume of credit and money.
War 'booms, too, are started by high credit demand-for destructive rather than for productive purposes.
Recovery can, of course, also start from a combination of changes on the supply and the demand side for credits.
By far the most important cause of recovery, which has at least reinforced all upswings of the past, is of a psychological nature.
After depressions have run their course for a certain time, pessimism some day reaches proportions which cannot be surpassed.
Consumers, in turn, no longer hope to buy cheaper later on.
According to Keynes depression comes to an end when an under-employment equilibrium is reached, Le.
when a fall in employment reduces incomes and thereby savings to the point where they can be absorbed by investment demand.
Depressions are neither reinforced by oversaving nor halted by under-saving.
And every depression has so far been followed by an upswing.
From Recovery to Boom What forces lead an economy from recovery to boom, and finally to that state of hypertension which ends in crises or depression?
THE BUSINESS CYCLE The answer is given by what we have said above in connection with psychological business cycle theories.
When the prices for finished products increase.under the impact of inflation-while production costs, especially wages, lag behindentrepreneurs will strive to expand production because such expansion will now appear profitable.
Credit demand rises.
This demand will be satisfied by the banks granting inflationary credits.
The new money reaches the markets directly or via wage earners.
The price level will be lifted anew, with the result that in the next production period expansion is further stimulated-provided that at least some of the costs remain stable.
Additional credit demand now emanates from these speculators.
If not deterred by higher interest, the speculators will now, too, enter the markets as buyers and join in bidding up prices, thus further reinforcing the stimulus to yet greater credit and production expansion in the next period.
The End of the Boom Recovery, as we have seen, can start from changes in demand for credits as well as in th~ supply of credits.
The supply of credits is curtailed when Central Banks raise COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS their discount rates.
Discount rates are hardly ever sufficiently raised to check a credit demand fanned by optimistic price and profit expectations of entrepreneurs and speculators.
Therefore the effects of tighter money are generally not felt until somewhat later, when the demand for credit, in its turn, collapses.
The demand for credits breaks down when the optimism of entrepreneurs and speculators has become so universal that the fever cannot spread to new layers of the population.
Total demand for productive and speculative credits will contract.
All production-and also all inventory accumulation-profitable only in inflationary condition-buyers' resistance, or buyers' strike.
Prices appear sudSome depressions clearly begin with a collapse of consumption-buyers' resistance, or buyers' strike.
Such changes on the demand and supply side of credit are able to break the boom quite independently of any tightening of credit supply by Central Banks.
In times of permanent easy money the interest policy of the banks does not change anyway.
None the less, even then the boom must collapse sooner or later-contrary to the expectations of certain easy money enthusiasts.
An attempt is made to determine, for instance, when a new plant to meet a certain demand will be completed, or when government THE BUSINESS CYCLE rearmament expenditure will termi1.1ate.
As already explained changes in demand calculable or calculated in advance cannot cause cyclical fluctuations, since adjustments will be made in the meantime.
The erroneous belief that the boom is there to stay, coupled with a lax credit supply policy, causes the economic activity to expand above average during prosperity.
coincide not with changes in objective data but with the collapse of the inflation mentality or with changes.in credit policy.
are erratic, inflationary phenomena caused in the last instance by lax taxation policy.
Delayed Deflation In most of the historically known depressions starting with a buyers' strike, deflation did not set in immediately.
Just as inflation does not "catch on" fully as long as many still do not believe in the upturn, so does deflation not fully operate as long as many entrepreneurs and speculators do not believe in the recession.
Additional credits are needed to carry inventories growing through unsold production.
Later, when the hope of price recovery and of avoiding inventory losses vanishes, these additional credits are liquidated.
The credit volume contracts,.
Interest Rates during the Cycle Generally speaking interest rates tend to rise during the upswing and to fall during the downswing.
At the beginning of recovery interest rates rise less than would correspond to the increased demand for.
During COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS the depression part of the money no longer needed disappeared into private hoards, the small death traps.
This money is now dishoarded and returns to circulation.
Thus a part of the new credits is financed by the money coming out of the death traps.
Free money market rates are, during the recovery phase, generally lower than the discount rates of Central Banks.
For those debtors having direct or indirect access to the Central Banks interest rates never rise much above discount rates.
When Central Banks eventually raise discount rates to the level of the natural rate, the whole interest structure stiffens, sometimes very substantially.
Toward the end of the boom interest rates are very high unless Central Banks have maintained their unnaturally low rates.
The beginning of the depression is usually accompanied by a further rise in interest rates.
In spite of the declining credit demand, money stringency can reach the proportions of a real money crisis.
Money crises from such causes will hardly be tolerated in the future.
When the money crisis subsides and carry-over credits are liquidated, interest rates decline.
But again they decline less than would correspond to the decreased credit demand.
Part of the money disappears in the small death traps, so that the credit supply decreases.
Thus, due to the small death traps, the volume of credit fluctuates during the cycle more than the interest rates.
As a rule, long-term rates (capital market rates) THE BUSINESS CYCLE fluctuate less than short-term rates (money market rates), because people generally do not expect extreme tightness or extreme easiness to last.
During prosperity capital market rates go up later than do money market rates.
During depression they fall later.
The reason is, again, that the tightness and easiness of money are at first regarded as only temporary.
They do not decline as quickly during depression as do the rates for first-class risks.
depression leaves risk premiums very -sometimes even prohibitively-high.
At the end of a depression the money market is characterized by extreme easiness, while many debtors still have to pay high rates for their credits.
Money Circulation during the Cycle Another phenomenon which we have already discussed in general terms in Part III, when describing inflation and deflation, can be observed very clearly during the cycle.
Prices and production fluctuate more than the quantity of money, or conversely the quantity of money is more stable than prices and production.
This phenomenon, too, is due to the decrease in private hoarding during recovery, and to its increase in depression.
Because of this so-called change in the velocity of circulation, prices and production may increase in the first case and decrease in the second even when the amount of money issued by the money-creating institutions-the official inflation, as we have called it-does not increase or decrease correspondingly.
Toward the end of the last war increase in the amount of banknotes issued by the Federal Reserve system was far in excess of increase in production and prices.
Black market operators and tax evaders, for obvious reasons, preferred cash to checking accounts.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS Cyclical Phenomena are Results o/Maladjustments Prosperity differs in nearly every respect from depression.
The most important and most conspicuous differences concern the general price level, employment and the capital structure of the economy.
All these differences are the results of changes in credit supply and demand.
They develop only under one further condition, namely, if at least part of the population fails to react-or to react at once-to these changes in credit supply and demand.
If, for instance, labor immediately adjusted its wage demands to higher prices, employment could not fluctuate.
Business cycles with all their sweeping changes can thus also be defined as changes in credit demand or supply, to which at least a part of the population does not adjust-or does so only belatedly.
Changes in the Capital Structure During the upswing the capital structure of the economy deepens, the roundabout ways of production lengthen.
The contrary happens during depression.
For during upswings the use of capital is-or appears-more profitable.
A new invention may have raised the productivity of capital.
Unless the cost of capital is adjusted to the higher profit expectations, increased amounts of capital will be used per unit of finished goods, or increased inventories will be carried.
During the downswing the use of capital is-or appearsless profitable.
Unless interest rates are adjusted to the lower profit expectations, the capital structure flattens.
In the special case of a war boom the capital structure does not deepen as a rule.
As a further peculiarity of war booms commodity prices-and thus rents on land-rise much higher than prices in general, whereas during every post-war period raw commodity prices THE BUSINESS CYCLE fall much lower than those of industrial products.
The reason for this phenomenon is that, on the one hand, a great waste of agricultural products takes place during wars, and, on the other hand, production of raw materials is much less elastic than industrial production, so that the prices of the former are much more sensitive to changes in the demand.
Changes in Employment The most characteristic phenomenon of the cycle is the fluctuation in employment.
When, during the upswing, money wages lag behind rising prices, thus lowering real wages, entrepreneurs are able to employ workers so far unemployable because insufficiently productive.
When, during depression, wages decrease more slowly than prices, entrepreneurs must dismiss workers.
The tendency of real wages to rise during depression, on the other hand, has been reinforced by union resistance against any lowering of money wages.
The result must .be .an increase in cyclical unemployment during depression.
The less elastic the labor supply, the less inflation increases employment-even.. though wage demands may lag behind price rises.
The supply curve of labor runs horizontally, because unions strive to main- tain a uniform wage level during depression.
While under such conditions employment is strongly curtailed during depression, it increases significantly during recovery, even if the demand for labor grows only slightly.
Through the increase in COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS employment, and hence in output, during the early stages of the upswing, the price-raising effects of increased demand are at least partly compensated by an increased supply of goods.
This, and not the alleged Keynesian real wage unconsciousness of labor, is the reason for what is called in German Mengenkonjunktur <volume prosperity).
It is a purely cyclical phenomenon and cannot be made the basis of a general theory -not even of a general inflation theory, as already explained in p. 94.
The increased monetary demand meets the products not only of the immediately preceding production period, but also of earlier periods.
Similarly, some capital goods -fixed capital-have not as yet been amortized into consumer goods.
Thus, products of earlier periods are in supply during the first stages of recovery.
The new workers' additional demand for consumption goods, and the new entrepreneurs' additional demand for capital goods, are at least partly satisfied by this supply.
Unit costs, it is true, decrease in many enterprises during recovery, until the best combination of fixed and variable costs-the combination for which the plant had been planned-is re-established.
But in the short run (and the cycle is a short-run phenomenon) unit costs are no more decisive for pricing than are total costs-the variable costs plus fixed costs.
Even if fixed costs are not covered by revenue, entrepreneurs continue to produce as long as variable costs are covered, for they have to pay the fixed charges in any case.
Therefore the increasing THE BUSINESS CYCLE marginal variable costs, and not the decreasing unit costs, determine the supply price of goods.
Profits and Losses during the Cycle Since cycles are essentially alternating inflations a.nd deflations, entrepreneurs reap inflation profits during prosperity and suffer deflation losses during depression.
As we have seen such profits and losses are due to three reasons: the increase (or decrease) of prices; the lag of production costs such as wages, interest rates and rents behind rising (or falling) prices; and the increase (or decrease) of real debts through inflation or deflation.
The lag of production costs behind rising or falling prices is greatest at the beginning and smallest at the end of boom and depression.
The hope of ever higher prices and the fear of ever lower prices lead to cumulative increases or decreases in credit demand, as long as credit supply is not tightened or eased correspondingly.
As recovery proceeds, unutilized or under-utilized equipment is put into use.
As soon as industrial plants produce the output for which they were originally built variable and fixed capital are again employed in optimum combination.
fluctuations of profits during the cycle are in all probability caused chiefly by fluctuations in the utilization of fixed capital.
Many economists believe that the traditional cycle is a thing of the past.
They maintain that the fluctuations of economic activity have, during the last two decades or so, been erratic rather than periodic and rhythmic.
They contend that the forces causing periodicity and rhythm are no longer working.
It is correct that in this age of armament races and other government interventions, fluctuations in demand emanating from the private sector of the economy can no longer affect the overall situation as they used to.
Nevertheless, some features of the cycle are still likely in the future.
The maldistribution of demand over time, even when emanating from exogenous, erratic factors, willstill be exaggerated by mass psychological reactions of the people, both upward and downward.
The demand pent up during the war would have been spread much more evenly over the entire period from 1945 to 1953.
The study of the nineteenth- and twentiethcentury cycles therefore remains of more than merely historical interest: the good old business cycle is still with us.
Stabilizing the Business Cycle As a means for the stabilization of the business cycle, American literature stresses the importance of what is called functional finance.
Functional finance is nothing else than a new version of the old prescription that governments should increase their expenditures during depressions and diminish them during booms.
I have elsewhere dealt extensively with the problem of business cycle stabilization by deficit spending.
3 Here I would only like to repeat that, in my opinion, most advocates of functional finance are guilty of gross oversimplification of the business cycle problems.
The early recognition of a boom presupposes all those qualities which are required for correct business or stock market forecasting.
Are the economic advisers of governments on the average particularly well qualified in this respect?
People with the rare gift of being able to recognize coming economic developments at an early stage will hardly enter government service.
Nor does there seem to be any reason why government advisors should be less susceptible to mass opinion than private business men and investors.
Governmental economic forecasts are, on the average, just as mistaken as those of the business world.
In the spring of 1949 the government warned against impending runaway inflation, at the very moment when the commodity markets broke.
In matters of business cycle stabilization, the spirit may be willing but the flesh tends to be weak.
Politicians will not seek to end a situation which can develop precisely because the business world regards it as normal and harmless.
The year-long fight of conservative economists against the permanent easy money policy was, therefore, bound to be unsuccessful.
The strong post-war inflation of 1945-51 could easily have been prevented by a restrictive credit policy.4 Attempts to shorten a deflationary depression are, of course, always popular.
But the effects of such government spending begun too soon will be practically nil.
The additional money immediately flows back into the banks.
It is a well-known fact that in economic and social life a phenomenon caused or reinforced by mass error has a tendency to disappear, or at least to weaken, once it has been observed for some time and begins to be understood.
It would seem as if something of this kind has happened in the field of business and stock market cycles.
Consumers and entrepr~neurs have become business cycle conscious.
They expect a depression long before it is actually due.
Much of what happened during the past few years is easily explicable by the public's greater business cycle consciousness.
It was, no doubt, greater business cycle consciousness which prompted the stock market to discount the 1949 recession two-and-a..half years in advance.
The bull market which started in mid-1949 and lasted to the end of 1952 never gave rise to prices out of proportion with yield in spite of a lax credit and monetary policy, the reason being that many stock exchange operators had been expecting a new depression ever since the beginning .of 1951.
Whether in the easy money boom that has been going on since September 1953 the lessons of the past will be heeded or forgotten remains to be seen.
Does Economic Growth Guarantee Lasting Prosperity?
It is often maintained that the growth of an economy, Le.
in the first instance the population growth, protects against depression.
During the war most American experts predicted a post-war depression.
Growth of population is supposed to lead to increased demand and thus to guarantee a market for expanded production.
Population growth, as such, leads neither to excessive labor supply nor to a particularly strong demand for goods.
If the latter were the case, the under-developed countries with their large birth rate would be the soundest economically because least subject to crises.
Population growth, as such, is neutral for an economy.
Population growth appears important only under certain assumptions concerning the simultaneous growth of capital.
In countries with slow capital formation, population growth lowers the standard of living, or, if wages are rigid, causes unemployment.
In countries with strong capital formation, population growth increases the demand for capital.
The expected decrease in population growth was, in fact, one of the main arguments of the stagnation theory.
However, it seems very doubtful whether such structural support of the demand for capital could compensate for a cyclical deficiency of demand at the onset of the depression.
That population growth guarantees prosperity is probably no more than one of those pseudoarguments regularly appearing after a few years of good business in order to rationalize the prevailing confidence in the future.
The contrary statement that a stationary population leads necessarily to a cyclical depression seems equally of doubtful value.
A slow lowering of the demand for capital will lower the interest rates but will never lead to the sudden deflations which are characteristic of the upper turning points.
Easy Money Policy and the Cycle It may be appropriate to add a few remarks about the influence of easy money policy on the course of the business cycle.
Before deliberate adoption of easy money policy, discount rates failed to be adjusted to free market rates because of institutional rigidities and misjudgments.
Since 1932, however, and even THE BUSINESS CYCLE more since the appearance of Keynes' General Theory in 1936, discount policy-at least in Great Britain and the United States -has been influenced by a belief in the beneficial effects of easy money on employment and public finance.
This belief was strongest in the United States when Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau directed war financing, and in Great Britain under the Labor Government after the war.
Lately the enthusiasm for easy money policy seems to have waned somewhat.
A return to common sense in theory and practice has taken place.
5 Easy money policy is a combination of two different policies: a policy of stabilizing interest rates, and a policy of stabilizing them at very low levels.
There are various reasons for the popularity of the latter policy-among them the naive belief that easy money guarantees full employment, the equally naive belief that the burden of the public debt could with in).punity be alleviated by artificially low interest rates, and last but not least resentment against unearned income in general.
Stabilizing Interest Rates Stability of interest rates always means instability' of the economy.
Stability of interest rates causes the death traps for money to -remain open much too long.
Fluctuations in the demand for credit are no longer checked by compensating movements of interest rates,.
so that money can freely flow into and out of banks and Central Banks.
Stabilizing Low Interest Rates Interest rates could be stabilized at a le.vel where credit demand and supply would balance at least over the average of Ii My opinion on the monetary policy from 1953 on will be gathered from the article in Appendix II (pp.
)~ COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS a cycle.
The post-war inflation in the United States and in Great Britain was chiefly the result of a totally unjustified maintenance of low interest rates.
It is not astonishing that permanent easy money policy should have created inflation.
Once easy money is considered legitimate and eternal, it is inflationary not only.
because it lowers the cost of credits, but also because confidence in permanently cheap money leads to belief in permanently rising prices.
In these circumstances it is, on the contrary, astonishing that price increases during the period of extreme easy money were not even greater and sharper.
The reason may have been that people in their historical subconsciousness still reckoned with the possibility of reversals.
This historical subconsciousness would eventually be destroyed if-as is often recommended-even "light" inflation became the object of deliberate government policy.
Securities during the Cycle Quite .generally speaking, common share prices depend on the one hand upon the dividends paid or expected, and on the other upon the prevailing yield of long-term bonds, i.e., the interest rates of the capital market.
The prices and yields of long-term bonds depend in the last instance upon interest rates for short-term credits, Le.
money market rates, and-indirectly -upon discount rates.
We have already mentioned the reasons for this lag: the relative stickiness of the discount rates of Central Banks and the existence of private hoards, out of which and into which money flows at first.
THE BUSINESS CYCLE Bond Prices and Capital Market Rates During depression long-term interest rate.s decline and bond prices rise, but not immediately after the easing of .money markets.
Investors having witnessed declining bond prices for a protracted period of time, remain at first bearish on bonds, i.e.
They do not yet believe that the easier money is there to stay.
A considerable margin between long-term and short-term interest rates therefore persists until investors gain confidence in the easing of the money markets and begin to switch from short-term to long-term investments.
In the later stages of prosperity money market rates rise considerably.
Investors who have seen rising, or at least stable, bond .prices for a long time do not believe that tight money is there to stay.
Later they begin to realize that the easy money period is over.
Common Share Prices We shall discuss the laws governing share prices in detail in Part V. Here we may anticipate that share prices, quite generally speaking, equal dividends capitalized at the prevailing long-term interest rate.
The picture of stock price movements during the cycle is therefore a complex one.
Although individual cycles differ from each other in share price movements more than in any other respect, we may perhaps venture to formulate the following general rule.
Toward the end of depression long-term interest rates decline, i.e.
As long as business stagnates and profit expectations COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS are bad, people have no confidence in the maintenance of dividends at even a low level.
Once business recovers, share prices move up vigorously under the double impact of higher profit expectations and lower and sometimes still declining interest rates.
of still higher dividends, compensate the higher rate at which they are capitalized.
Finally dividends decline, and now share prices, too, decline under the double impact of lower dividends and higher capital market rates.
Sequence of Interest Rate, Bond and Share Price Movements The sequence of the changes in short-term interest rates, bond and share prices, and in economic activity may be illustrated by Figure 22.
The curves roughly correspond to the old so-called Harvard business barometer.
They do not, of course, give a picture of what really happened during the historically known cycles, nor even of what happened "averagely" or generally.
Nor is the graph purely speculative, for every cycle observed during history showed at least some of the sequences represented.
The curves of business activity and of.
Contrary to a widely held opinion, it was not typical of most past business cycles for share price movements to precede business activity movements.
money market rates begin to fall about the middle of the depression, and the inverse curve of interest rises.
When money market rates have fallen to a certain extent, bond prices begin to move up.
Economic activity and share prices THE BUSINESS CYCLE begin to pick up when the inverse curve of money market rates has reached its peak, Le.
When business is at its peak, short-term interest rates harden.
Later, .long-term Prosperity Depression "" --~ \ "" \ ",, \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ .
\ \ \ L \ \ \ \ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Business activity _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Share prices _________ Interest rates (inverse) _ _ _ _ _ _ Bond prices FIG.
Business activity and share prices remain high in spite of hardening short-term and long-term interest rates.
This is due to the fact that profits are still increasing and compensate for the higher rates of capitalization.
Later, when depression sets in, business and share prices fall and bonds decline even further.
Business activity and share prices remain low during the further course of depression, although interest rates soon decline and bond prices later begin to rise.
This is because COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS still declining earnings counteract the lower rates of capitalization.
Fluctuation in the Yield of Common Shares Theoretically and a priori prices of common stock should always stabilize at a level where their yield exactly equals the yield of long-term bonds.
Their yields are ~ormally higher than the yields on long-term bonds.
In recent decades, yield differentials have been substantial in the United States, for a variety of reasons such as high income taxes, fear of labor unrest and other troubles.
Share yields fluctuate over the course of the cycle.
At the depth of depressions they are usually high, and share prices therefore relatively low, because investors fear dividends will fall further.
At the height of the boom yields are usually low and prices relatively high because investors hope that dividends will increase further.
This is by no means self-evident.Theoretically, earnings on invested capital cannot exceed the interest rate at which new credits are demanded.
However, for the above-mentioned psychological reasons, the supply price of equity capital may differ from that of loans.
In a depression, funds for bonds may be provided say at 3 per cent, whereas shares are bought only on a higher than 7 per cent yield basis.
Earnings, Dividends and Share Prices Companies generally payout only part of their earnings as dividends.
They use the rest to create or increase reserve funds, or they plough it back into the business in order to increase their fixed and variable capital.
In recent years, and especially under the impact of high personal income taxes, the percentage THE BUSINESS CYCLE 0' earnings distributed to shareholders in the United States has diminished so that undistributed earnings are now often greater than dividends.
Independent Share Price Cycles The correlation of stock market movements and changes in business activity has become less close in the past two decades ~ than it used to be.
Net earnings are nowadays affected by corporation taxes and other burdens imposed on business much more than by purely economic changes in gross' earnings.
The New York bear market of 1939-42, for instance, was created through f~r .of impending war taxation' rather than fear of bad busirtess.
Only the future will tell whether and to what extent stock exchange bull and bear markets will continue to occur independently of business cycles.
Part VI PRICE FORMATION ON STOCK MARKETS Significance of the Problem The study of price formation on security markets, and particularly common stock markets, is as interesting and important for the economist as for bankers or investors.
The study of the stock market more than that of any other market can help the theoretician to understand the interrelation between the world of facts and the world of expectations-so much discussed just now.
The business man, on the other hand, may learn through such study some useful rules which, otherwise, he might have to acquire by lengthy and possibly costly experience.
Much of what I have to say here is concerned with the laws of mass psychology influencing the formation of stock market prices.
Although my exposition may help the business man to a clearer understanding of what, in the past, he may have realized instinctively and inde.ed used profitably in business nothing I say is really new.
a ratio between income and price, which equals the yield on long-term bonds.
Given full confidence in the maintenance of the dividends, there would at this price, be no reason for switching from stock to loans or bonds, or vice versa, and thus for stock market transactions which would lower or raise prices.
Share prices would, therefore, be bound to fluctuate with dividends, provided no changes in the long-term interest rate .influenced share prices from the money side.
How far is this conclusion confirmed by actual price movements on stock markets?
A glance at two charts from Moody's Investment Service representing developments on the New York Stock Exchange from 1929 to the spring of 19562 shows that the thesis of a close correlation between share prices and dividends is valid only with severe restrictions.
Let us compare-in Figure 23a-the development of dividends and share prices.
We immediately see that the broad upward and downward movements on the stock market, the so-called bull markets and bear markets, do indeed correspond with the upward and downward movements of dividends in many, though not in all, cases.
The post-war bull market from 1949 to the end of 1952, on the other hand, returned to the normal pattern of simultaneously rising share prices and dividends.
During the subsequent bull market, since September 1953, both share prices and dividends have been rising.
Though dividends and prices often moved in the same direction, the movement was by no means parallel.
the dividends expressed as a percentage of price, rise in a bear market because share prices fall more th(ln dividends, so that the latter represent a higher percentage of prices.
In a bull market the yields decline because share prices rise more than dividends, so that the latter represent a smaller percentage of prices.
Figure 23b provides an even better illustration of the development of the yields.
We see that by and large the lowest yields (about 3 per cent) coincide with the highest share prices in 1929, 1937 and 1946, whereas the highest yields (mostly 7-8 per cent) coincide with the lowest prices in 1932, 1942 and 1949.
Incidentally, Figure 23 b shows also that changes in yields were hardly ever influenced from the money side.
Since 1937 the yield on bonds did not change significantly, thanks to a deliberate easy money policy.
The strong ups and downs of share yields can, therefore, not have originated from the money side.
The 1953 bear market and the subsequent recovery are, however, again clearly connected with the yields on bonds, which first rose and later declined.
We gain an entirely different picture, however, if we compare dividend curves with price curves from which the exaggerations of boom and depression have been eliminated by some statistical methods-.-.:..
not just dividends capitalized at current interest rates, but they do fluctuate around a level determined by capitalization of current dividends at the current interest rate.
But share prices coincide with dividends capitalized at the prevailing interest rates every time the market capitalizes dividends at an average yield rate.
Dividends, Net Earnings and Share Prices A third curve in Figure 23a represents net earnings of corporations.
net earnings, pursue a policy of more or less stable dividends and distribute during prosperity a smaller-during depression a higher-percentage of earnings as dividends.
This is so altqough only dividends create income for the shareholder, and the undistributed part of earnings is important to him only in so far at it improves the quality of the dividends and the ability to produce future dividends.
Figure 23a shows that until about 1938 share prices and net earnings did, indeed, move in a fairly parallel way.
In 1951 no parallelism between net earnings and share prices is observable.
Since then, earnings and prices have risen, but the latter much more steeply than the former.
The generally greater stability of the price-earning ratio as against the price-dividend ratio explains a peculiarity of stock market literature.
If future prices are to be forecast on the estimate of future earnings, the previous price-earning ratio, i.e.
If, for instance, net earnings of a share are expected to be $10.00, and if the average price-earning ratio of the share has so far been 12 : 1, then the future average price of the share is believed to be $120.
T he Significance of the Past for the Future If share prices at a given time are identical with dividends capitalized at a certain yield rate, then stock market forecasts must obviously include prediction of future dividends as well as of future yield rates.
Can such forecasts be made on the basis of past dividends and past yield rates?
Any forecast of the future must always start from a study of past developments of the market as a whole as well as of indi.. vidual corporations.
Dividends fluctuate not only within each business cycle, but also from one cycle to another.
The Dow Jones Index should have stood at about 375, rather than at about 275 as it actually did-a difference by no means unimportant for investment and speculation.
In such cases some reversal of price trends is indeed very probable-toward a bull market in the first case, toward a bear market in the second.
Unfortunately, neither future fluctuations of the economy nor the extent to which th,e stock markets will overor under-discount these fluctuations can be scientifically or objectively determined in advance.
If this is true of the stock market as a whole, the subject of so-called market analysis, it is even more true of prices of individual shares, the subject of so-called securities analysis.
The dividends of individual corporations fluctuate quite differently in each business cycle.
Whole industries, moreover, may profit or lose from one cycle to another.
To anybbdy who has doubts in this respect, perusal of the well-known work by Mead and Grodzinsky, The Ebb and Flow of Investment, is strongly recommended.
Expectations as the Cause of Market Distortions The fluctuations of share prices are essentially due to two causes: the fluctuations in dividends and net earnings, and the fluctuations in the rate of interest at which the fluctuating dividends are capitalized.
We have, in earlier sections, discussed the reasons for fluctuations in earnings and resulting dividends within a cycle and in the long run.
Every investor and speculator knows that a correct forecast of the rate at which dividends will be capitalized is decisive for the success or failure of almost any transaction.
It is extraordinarily difficult to act against the .general market tendency resulting from changes in yield.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS Why does the stock market capitalize dividends sometimes at an excessively high, sometimes at an excessively low rate?
stock market always discounts the future dividends and never the present.
It is not easy to answer the question of how long in advance the stock market discounts future developments and changes.
It must be borne in mind, however, that if any future change is to lead to changes in the valuation of a share-or of all shares-it must be expected to be permanent.
The prices of such shares generally fluctuate less than their dividends.
Any actual rise or fall in the prices of such shares is due to an expectation of a long-term rise' or fall of their average dividends.
Model of a Typical Stock Market Movement All stock market movements known from historical observation differ, particularly with respect to the margin between current and expected dividends.
Some correlations do, none the less, return with such regularity that we may speak of typical stock market movements.
Yields are high because even lower dividends are expected in the future.
The reasons for such pessimism have often been discussed.
First, in mass psychology, a sort of law of inertia seems to prevail; if the economic situation has deteriorated and dividends have fallen for a long time, then people expect this downward movement to continue until they are proved wrong by very drastic contrary experiences.
Each individual investor is led to conclude that if share prices are low, they are so because there are good reasons why they should be. '
Dividends rise;in addition, future expectations improve as a result of the rising, dividends.
The future is expected to be neither better nor worse than the present.
The rise in dividends and prices for a protracted period leads to general, optimism regarding future dividends.
The market discounts not only the current high level of dividends, but a still higher level in the future.
24 Our description of a typical stock market cycle, incidentally, agrees with the widespread opinion that any upward or downward movement on the stock market is divided into three distinct parts: one in which shares are under-valued, one in which they are correctly valued, and one in which they are over-valued.
At the same time it provides an approximate answer to the question whether and when current prices correctly discount the future, PRICE FORMATION ON STOCK MARKETS and when and to what extent the stockmarket makes mistakes.
Let us assume that investors and speculators really discount the future about twelve months in advance.
Up to point X the bull market takes too unfavorable a view of the future, beyond point X too favorable a view.
Up to point Y the bear market takes too favorable a view of the future, beyond point Y too unfavorable a view.
There is nothing to the alleged prophetic gifts of the stock market.
The stock market does, indeed, try to guess the future, but it usually fails.
Uncertainty and Error as Price-Forming Factors In the last analysis the stock markets err simply because the future differs from the present-a stationary state exists only in theory-and because human beings have no knowledge of the future in this or any other field.
If it were possible to foresee the future correctly, say one year in advance, then the movements in share prices would simply precede the actual changes by one year.
And if we had the perfect foresight of which theoreticians speak, that is to say, if we could correctly foresee an indefinite future, then all future changes would be discounted by present prices.
The distant future ~annot even be assessed by probability judgments; it lies, shrouded in mist, beyond the horizon of time.
The nearer future may, however, be gauged by probability judgments.
As time goes on, the near future becomes the present and can be recognized as certain.
At the same time, however, a new segment of the future rises above the horizon of time.
Men wishing to make decisions involving the future, must again try to guess its probable course.
is no point in deferring economic decisions "until the future is clear".
The future is never clear.
Single features of the future may be visible with certainty COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS in the present.
But only isolated events are thus visible, and never the whole complex future upon which earnings of any security depend.
In these cases the margin between probability judgments and actual knowledge becomes small, and share prices reflect the objective situation more correctly.
Purchases on the stock markets, as indeed on any other markets dealing with commodities of uncertain future value, are purchases of chances.
All stock market transactions are thus based on probability judgments.
Much ingenuity, indeed perhaps too much ingenuity and certainly too much mathematics, has been deployed to reach, in the end, results by and large long known to any business man endowed with a reasonable measure of common sense.
The following paradox is responsible for the extraordinary difficulty in forming an opinion on the nature of probability judgments in business.
On the one hand, the law of large numbers undoubtedly does not apply to forecasts of individual market situations.
The probabilities entering, for instance, into judgments about the future course of an individual business cycle are not, strictly speaking, probabilities in the mathematical sense.
The case is comparable not to that of the bank in Monte Carlo, which can and does rely on red and black turning up equally often in the .long run, PRICE FORMATION ON STOCK MARKETS but rather to that of the individual player, who cannot know whether the ball will stop on red or on black.
He may speak of a 10:1 chance that General Motors will double its dividend, although he knows perfectly well that he is faced with an individual situation and not with a large number of interchangeable cases.
As a result he will be content with a~ much smaller gain when playing a color-yet the very next turn of the wheel may throw up the individual number he had in mind.
We would add only that a player, as well as a stock market speculator, will often play the chance of doubling his stake not only when he considers the odds as 1: 1 but also when he considers them to be poorer.
Weighing the Chances Offer and demand prices on stock markets may perhaps be explained fairly realistically by the following example.
Suppose someone believes the chance that the shares of General Motors may rise to $70 is 1:4, and the risk of their falling to $30 is 3 : 4.
Provided our buyer's judgment is distorted neither by a passion for gambling nor by unusual anxiety, his purchase limit will not exceed $40, because at this price the chance of profit and the risk of loss will appear equivalent.
We must, of course, always keep in mind that the underlying probability judgments are highly subjective.
An optimistic buyer will over-estimate the chances of gain and under-estimate the risks of loss.
Expectations of the future are usually concerned with several favorable or unfavorable possibilities.
The question, of how these different chances are weighed against each other and what the economic consequences will be, is highly controversial.
In our example the buyer may believe that, besides the probabilities mentioned, there is a further 1: 8 chance that the shares of General Motors will move up to $80, and a 3: 8 risk that they will drop to $20.
The very existence of the economy would be endangered, and with it economics as a science.
On the other hand, Keynes has clearly stated in his General PRICE FORMATION ON STOCK MARKETS Theory that stock market prices are essentially the result of purely subjective anticipations.
Indeed he went so far as to assert that these anticipations are not concerned with the objective facts themselves, but with the.
anticipation of the facts.
It is interesting to note that in practice business men, too, partly adopt the one and partly the other view.
We find stock market forecasts based entirely on the pr'ediction of facts.
The objective situation is as important for price formation on the stock market as is the running hare for the hunter.
In a widely known passage of his General Theory, Keynes has drawn from the undoubted dependence of stock market prices upon subjective factors, moods and errors the conclusion that the flow of savings into investments is no longer dictated COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS by long-run expectations of yield, but rather by short-run expectations of stock market gains, particularly in the United States.
Keynes recommends as a remedy that the bonds between investor and investment be made as indissoluble as those of marriage, which can be separated only by death or for very important reasons.
In other words, Keynes opposes negotiability of investments in securities so as to prevent short-term speculation.
Keynes' reasoning confuses two different things: short-term investment or speculation in investments planned for the long run, and short-term investment or speculation in investments planned for the short run.
The fact that the more distant future cannot be assessed so clearly never leads to its being neglected.
However much anyone may invest for capital appreciation, he still invests with a view to the long-term earnings.
It is true that during a bull market long-term prospects are, for a more or less limited period, considered more favorable than during a bear market.
In the last analysis the stock market is neither the heating nor the refrigerating installation of the economy but its thermometer.
It is also true that there are always some people whose decisions are not based on present or future yields, .but.
Were the link between investor and investment to be made as indissoluble as marriage, fluctuations of prices would indeed be reduced.
But the cost of such reduction would be a contraction of investment to the small volume of early capitalism and an obstruction of economic progress, which is decisively dependent upon the free flow of venture capital from the saver to the entrepreneur.
Interpersonal Differences of Expectations Booms are due to a raising of the prices at which stocks are demanded and offered by individual buyers and sellers, depressions to a reduction of these prices.
These changes in price limits are the result of changes in expectations.
/ If the expectations of all parties to the markets changed simultaneously and to the same extent, prices would rise in the COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS boom and decline in the depression without any turnover.
As is well known, neither booms nor depressions proceed without large, though fluctuating, turnover.
The result is, in any case, that during every boom and depression the distribution of securities between individuals, and groups of individuals, changes continuously.
Shifts in the Distribution of Securities Shifts in the distribution of securities are hard to trace.
At the same time, they do not underrate the power of mass opinion, so that they neither sell too early, i.e.
At the same time, they underrate the force of mass error.
Emancipation from Mass Opinion As every experienced market operator knows, success on the stock market depends decisively on the ability to go against the prevailing tendency, Le.
The ability to go against the prevailing tendency, however, presupposes in the first instance that the individual remains conscious of the persuasive influence of mass opinion on his own opinion.
,An.experienced stock market operator will always listen with special attention to any arguments in opposition to the prevailing opinion.
We have seen that mass opinion does sometimes, and for certain periods, constitute a force operating either with or against objective data and whose great strength must be taken into account.
They may be right in the long run, but may lose their money and their nerves in the meantime.
From the point of view of each individual mass opinion is indeed a datum until it collapses or reverses itself.
This, incidentally, is the reason why some economists have recently compared economic decisions to gambling decisions, where much depends on the unforeseen action of others and on sheer chance.
1 doubt whether it will prove to mean a real progress in economics.
The actions of economic subjects are hardly ever accidental and arbitrary..
This is especially true of economic subjects on the average.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS The Basic Principle of Successful Investment With the help of our model it should, in theory, be quite easy for investors or speculators to time their purchases and sales correctly.
Only Minority Forecasts are Useful It is too often and too easily overlooked that stock market forecasts can lead to gains only when they are minority forecasts.
As soon as any opinion about future developments and their effect on the behavior of investors and speculators becomes general, both factors are discounted in the price.
The margin between present and future prices, the basis of any stock market gain, vanishes.
Suppose, for instance, that economists calculate that capital investment will be higher next year than this year and that the general price level will therefore rise.
consist of knowing economists and ignorant business men.
As a result, inventories were too large in 1951 and prices tended to fall.
Since most information nowadays is accessible to the public, it fails to be useful to any individual.
The future always remains uncertain, because we are unable to survey all the links which connect the past with the future.
Others consult the so-called business leaders among their acquaintances.
They forget that business leaders, with few exceptions, are always surprised by any reversal of tendency.
If business leaders in general were able to recognize coming cyclical changes, the business cycle could not develop.
Some investors follow certain systems, .for instance the socalled Daw theory.
This theory has many adherents and as a result it often proves right, if only for a short time.
Many thorough investigations have shown the practical value of this theory to be very limited.
The Daw theory, in particular, does no more than register the existence of a bull or bear market-it does not predict them.
Appendix 1 PROSPERITY BY INFLA TIONl The United States is again flooded with forecasts on the economic "future.
The year 1953 Will be one of continued high level economic activity; a depression of moderate extent and duration is bound to set in during 1954 at the latest.
The boom will end mainly for three reasons: armament spending will decline, industrial investment for enlarged and improved production will have reached its peak, housing construction will be lower.
2 A protracted depression, however, is not to be feared if.
that the government will be able and willing to replace dwindling demand by deficit spending and other devices.
To a younger generation of economists brought up to think along the lines of the Keynesian employment theory, such a forecast and argumentation seem entirely normal and in order.
For they consider employment as depending on demand, and demand in turn as depending on propensitieR to consume and invest which appear predestined or at least calculable in advance.
"3 Here it suffices to recall that in an economy still free in essential parts, the maldistribution of demand over time 1 Appeared first in The Commercial and Financial Chronicle, New York, February 19, 1953.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS -called the business cycle-is dependent on the behavior of innumerable individual consumers and producers.
But who believes seriously in the possibility of forecasting, for instance, future consumer spending which directly and indirectly influences aggregate demand more than anything else?
And as to investment-spending no prediction is possible without definite knowledge of the future in general, and future wage and monetary policies in particular.
Errors in judging the future made by the majority of the people are a necessary concomitant of and one of the chief reasons for cyclical movements.
Therefore forecasting future markets can always only be a highly subjective art, never an objective science.
It is highly probable that the present studies of "Markets after the Defense Expenditures" will prove, for all practical purposes, as valueless as the wartime studies of "Markets after the War" on which so much money and work were spent.
There is, at least in theory, nothing unavoidable in a slump.
If the present boom leads a year hence to a depression, this would only prove that consumers' and producers' demands had been allowed to grow too strong in the present, that the horse had not been reined in in time.
In other words, the banks, with the assistance of the Federal Reserve System, have through the granting of inflationary credits created in the present an excess of effective demand which will be lacking at a PROSPERITY BY INFLATION later date.
If this is correct, then the logical attitude toward a future depression is not to forecast and await it fatalistically, but rather to prevent it by putting brakes on the boom before it enters its excessive phase.
A Crucial Moment in the Current Prosperity Phase But is not all this only of theoretical interest?
I personally think that it is indeed high time to take steps toward a restrictive monetary policy which would transfer part of the present effective demand to the future.
I believe that if we let the boom run, we are just repeating the mistakes of the war (which cost the dollar 50 per cent of its purchasing pqwer), and of the period following the outbreak of the Korean war.
But if the demand for credits should not subside, much more drastic steps would have to be taken.
Still no interests are paid on demand deposits and only very low ones on time deposits-and a change is not even considered.
Tpis proves how far off we still are from what in the pre-easy-money days would.
In order to support our view, we shall first examine the features and the strength of the present inflation as it has developed since the autumn of 1949, the period usually referred to as the second post-war boom-the first post-war boom extending from the beginning of 1946 until the end of 1948.
Comparisons between the two second post-war periods are indeed illuminating.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS Industrial Production Since 1949 As is well known, industrial production as measured by the Federal Reserve Index has risen from about 175 to about 234.
Whatever the shortcomings of an index based upon the so-called physical volume may be, one cannot fail to be very impressed by this increase of almost 33 per cent, especially if one considers that the new top surpasses the top of the first post-war boom at the end of 1948 by roughly 40 points.
It must therefore to a large extent be the result of higher productivity through rationalization of the productive process, higher capital investment, and maximal and optimal utilization of all resources through their full employment.
There remains, however, the question whether and to what extent this achievement is due to the special conditions of inflation, and also whether the same high production could not have been obtained without it.
In other words, whether we never "had it so good" only because of an unnecessary inflation.
Loan Inflation How strongly has inflation progressed since 19497 When we examine developments in the field.of money and credit, our attention is immediately drawn to the appalling increase in loans of commercial banks during the last three and a half years.
Not all the additional loans granted during boom periods are inflationary, .I.e.
granted through new demand deposits, new bank money.
Some parts of bank loans are granted out of genuine savings and are therefore not at all inflationary, as for instance loans granted by savings banks against mortgages.
At that time the increase in loans was accompanied by a decrease in the holdings of government securities, with the result that the total of loans and investments remained pretty stable.
Since 1949 the holding of government securities no longer decreased, so that the net effect of the loan increase of $20 billion, plus the increase of some other assets, is an increage in tDtal IDa.ns and investments of commercial banks from roughly $114 to roughly $145 billion, an increase of $31 billion.
$12 billion, during the whole eight-year period from 1921 to 1929.
Total deposits with commercial banks increased since 1949 from roughly $145 to about $176 billion, demand deposits increasing from $96 to about $112 billion, and time deposits from roughly $35 to $43 billion.
As people hardly ever save genuinely in demand deposits from which they receive no interest, the increase in demand deposits may roughly correspond to the increase in circulating bank money.
the money side, we find that since 1949 demand deposits of aU banks have increased from about $96 billion to about $112 billion, or almost by 20 per cent.
This compares with an increase from $18 to $21 billion, or only 15 per per cent, during the eight-year period from 1921 to 1929.
But in order to judge the extent of inflation, not only the quantity but ,also the velocity of turnover of bank money has to be taken into account.
The annual rate of turnover of demand deposits at member banks in New York increased since 1949 from about 28 per cent to about 36 per cent, and in other leading cities from about 18 per cent to about 22 per cent-on average, therefore, somewhere between 20 per cent and 30 per cent.
We may, therefore, conclude that effective demand emanating from bank money during a unit of time has increased fr0Il.l $96 billion to say 125 per cent of $112 billion, or $14~ billion, i.e.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS Currency Inflation People pay, of course, not only with bank money but also with cash.
Currency in circulation increased during our period from about $27 billion to about $30 billion, or roughly 10 per cent..
Thus currency has increased much less than bank money.
It is interesting to compare what happened during the period from 1921 to 1929.
Although bank money increased from $18 to $21 billion, or 15 per cent, currency in circulation did not increase at all; it even declined slightly.
The obvious explanation is that some of the money hoarded during the war was still coming back into circulation, as, incidentally, it also did during the first post-war boom from 1945 to 1949, when demand deposits increased whereas currency in circulation dropped.
The return of hoarded currency may explain why circulating bank money now again has increased much faster than circulating currency.
Our contention that the quantity of bank money has increased almost 25 per cent is, incidentally, confirmed by the movements of the counterpart of demand deposits, the reserve balances of member banks with the Federal Reserve Banks.
Price Inflation What have been the effects on the price level of such a credit and money inflation?
They have since declined to 110 per cent, with the net result that wholesale prices, too, have over the whole period increased roughly by 12 per cent.
Thus price inflation has been much weaker than money and credit inflation.
This development has again an interesting parallel in the second post-war boom period of 1921-29.
In spite of the strong credit inflation consumers' prices remained practically unchanged during the whole period, whereas wholesale prices, after some increase in 1925 and a persistent fall from then on, returned to where they started.
This inflation without inflation was at that time widely discussed and various explanations advanced-the best being that productivity per man-hour had increased simultaneously.
Price PROSPERITY BY INFLATION stability alone can therefore never prove the absence of money inflation.
Money Inflation With and Without Price Inflation Money inflation since 1949 which-taking into account the increase in the velocity of turnover-was in the magnitude of roughly 50 per cent, has undoubtedly been partly a money inflation with price inflation, the price level having risen by roughly 12 per cent.
But it has obviously been, too-repeating the phenomenon of the twenties-partly a money inflation without price inflation.
As far as this is the case, the higher monetary demand must have spent itself not on higher prices but on the larger product which indeed came to the markets as a result of the tremendous increase in productivity mentioned above.
This leads to the very important question: is a money inflation going along with price stability an inflation at all?
Does it create all the dangers of a money inflation with price inflation, especially that of a later deflationary slump?
In other words is inflated money neutral money as long as it has no effect on the price level?
In spite of an almost total price stability over the whole period the credit inflation of the twenties ended with probably the biggest deflationary crash of all time.
Thus neutrality of money cannot be judged without taking into consideration whether or not cost-lowering factors working simultaneously have counteracted the effects of money inflation on the price level.
If they have, money is not neutral and the boom is inflationary in spite of price stability.
It is an important criterion of an inflationary boom that entrepreneurs expand production under the impact of profit-margins increased by inflation.
Costs decline through increased productivity of production factors-at least as long as these have not adjusted their demands fully to the change.
And prices remain stable because demand expanded by inflation prevents them from declining in accordance with sinking costs.
When inflation no longer progresses, goods produced under the assumption of everrising demand become unsalable.
Greater Production and Higher Elnployment During Inflation If this is correct-and the experiences of the twenties seem to prove the accuracy of the statement-then also the popular argument, that a higher bank money and currency circulation is justified and made innoxious by higher production, must be considered an error.
It is due to thinking along the lines of a very crude quantity theory of money.
If production increases with employment unchanged, it is because the employed have become more productive and unit costs have thus declined.
Nor does an increased labor force justify a higher quantity of money and / or a higher velocity of its turnover.
In order to employ, say, 10 per cent more labor at the same wages entrepreneurs need 10 per cent more funds-not taking into consideration the capital needed to buy the material and the equipment to work on and with.
If such funds are provided by newly created money, this means inflation, even if through a rising productivity prices remain stable on the markets.
where the new money is spent.
Although this fact will hardly be grasped by our inflation-minded generation, the labor force can be increased without recourse to inflation only if either genuine saving furnishes the funds necessary to pay and equip the workers, or if wages are reduced as the number of employed increases.
Every Cycle is Inflationary There is nothing astonishing in the serious credit and money inflation experienced since 1949. Credit and money inflations are -this is the essence of all so-called monetary business cycle theories-if not the sufficient reason then the necessary condition for every cyclical upswing.
But this does not solve the question of whether the present inflationary prosperity is not, or has not already PROSPERITY BY INFLATION been, moving for some time above what could be called the trendline of long-term economic growth.
Such an estimate is, however, as mentioned, wholly subjective and dependent on the business cycle feeling, the Konjunkturgefuhl of the individual observer.
As already mentioned, entrepreneurs decide during the upswing to expand their production mainly under the impact of extra profits resulting from inflated demand.
If production is to be expanded, new loans have to be asked for and granted.
This brings new money into circulation, with the result that demand for the products coming to the markets is again higher than expected.
regarded as sound as long as expectations of future prices are based on what has happened in the past on the markets.
But after a certain time entrepreneurs, having experienced over and over again-maybe for years-that demand turns out to be stronger than expected, begin to reckon with a permanent repetition of such favorable developments.
They plan and carry .out investments meant to meet an ever-increasing demand.
The thirteen pre-war, war and post-war years, with their almost uninterruptedly increas'" ing demand, seem to have rendered entrepreneurs unable to believe that this increase can one day stop or be reversed.
This strongly suggests that many marginal ventures have been undertaken which will have to be liquidated.
To such a pessimistic prognosis it is often objected that entrepreneurs are, in fact, on the average not over-optimistic nowadays; that they do not expect demand to stay high indefinitely.
It has grown business-cycle conscious.
And this cycle consciousness has indeed prevented until now the boom from becoming excessive.
However, if we analyze closely what can be called the present general opinion, we see that,' in fact, people anticipate the coming of a depression, but that they are also convinced that it will be only a very short and mild one.
In other words, it is expected that demand will be lacking only in the short and not in the longer run.
Consequently entrepreneurs seem in fact in the aggregate not to be over-optimistic in their decisions for the nearer future.
But for the more remote future their decisions are by no means based on pessimism.
They are committing themselves to long-run investments that seem warranted only under the assumption of a permanently expanding demand.
In short, entrepreneurs are adjusting to a short and mild but not to a long drawn out and severe depression.
But in the past few weeks even a short and mild depression seems no more to be envisaged.
The fact that the depression expected by many for 1951, and then for 1952, has not materialized until now has not only induced the forecasters to postpone the day of reckoning further into the future, but after the future has PROSPERITY BY INFLATION approached it has also induced some of the official and semiofficial forecasters to postpone the moment of the depression to Calendas Graecas.
again toward an eternal prosperity" Objections to a Restrictive Money and Credit Policy A really restrictive money and credit policy will, of course, be met by many with strong resistance.
Interest rates have become somewhat flexible during 1952, although only on a homeopathic scale.
The effect of even this slight departure from permanent easy money may 'have, or should have, convinced the easy-money economists of the effectiveness of higher interest rates as an anti-inflation weapon.
It is correct that such spending is insensitive to changes in the interest rates.
change in interest rates-could and would have been deferred into the future under the impact of high interest rates.
Another objection to an anti-inflationary money and credit policy-paradoxically often advanced by the same economistscontends that such a policy would, on the contrary, be too effective, COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS that once deflation started "no one knows how far it will go."
Keynesians analyze the economy in terms of effective demand only.
They naturally conclude that only by preventing monetary demand from declining from high levels can full employment be maintained.
Full employment on a lower level of monetary demand is (as they consider wages as fixed) unthinkable, and a restrictive money policy therefore taboo to them.
Conservative economists analyze an economy in terms of demand and supply.
They believe that at every level of monetary demand full employment can be maintained if only the supply prices of the factors of production are adjusted to the price level.
The most serious hindrance to a sound money policy that would brake a boom voluntarily in time is, of course, that such a policy is extremely unpopular.
It is much easier to let things run, and to represent the inevitable deep depression following an exaggerated boom as an unavoidable fate under the unholy capitalistic system, and then to cry for government intervention.
Appendix II THE ECO,NOMIC SITUATION IN THE UNITED ST A TESt Since about the middle of 1953 production in the United States has been receding; unemployment has been rising and has reached quite substantial proportions in some places and in some industries.
In some circles of entrepreneurs, but above all in circles of ,trade unions, the future is regarded with apprehension.
There is no doubt that it is, for the economic and political fate not only of the United States but also of Europe, of the highest importance who will prove to be right in this controversy.
I have described developments of the monetary sphere until the end of 1952 in my article "Prosperity by Inflation.
The one demanding curtailment can be described as the Conservative Neo-classic.
The other, which considered a further expansion as permissible or unobjectionable, can be described as the Keynesian New Dealistic.For both opinions are in fact nothing else but the expression of those opposing con- ceptions of.
economic life which, during the past two decades, have :& Translation of an address delivered at.
COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS put a stamp on all economic and political discussions in almost every sphere.
Therefore they now demanded, too, the braking of the boom through higher interest rates and other means of credit restrictions.
This demand of the conservative economists was the logical consequence of their ideas about the business cycle and the methods for its stabilization.
For neo-classical economists the business cycle is basically nothing else but an intertemporal maldistribution of aggregate demand.
In contrast to the so-called stagnation theoreticians, who believe that the demand for credit can in the long run vanish through lack of investment opportunities, these economists are of the opinion that short-term phenomena are at stake.
What is too little invested during the depression is too much invested during the boom.
They contend that by preventing an excess investment during the preceding boom the investment deficit of the following depression can be avoided.
By making the supply of credit more expensive, the exaggeration of the prosperity phase of the cycle, and thus the following depression, could and should be prevented.
This is the method of fighting the depression by fighting the preceding boom.
One can describe it also as a method of stabilizing the cycle at the average level.
It considers this-provided that the preceding boom has been braked by raising the interest rate-as necessary and sufficient to increase, by stimulating the use of credit, the aggregate demand of the economy and restore full employment.
Keynesian New Dealistic economists, in spite of many reservations, do not recognize the necessity of braking the boom before it begins to collapse by itself.
They speak of stabilizing the cycle at the level of highest employment.
They know, it is true, that one day the demand must dwindle and the reaction set in.
This is indeed the position which before THE ECONOMIC SITUATION IN THE U.S.A. 1953 was taken by New Dealistic economists like Hansen, Harris, and, above all, by the leaders of trade unions who denounced every possible increase in the cost of credit as a wicked interference in the full employment policy and an unwarranted gift of advantages to the capitalist class.
One can describe the method of business cycle stabilization demanded by the Keynesians also as the method of stabilizing the cycle at its highest possible level.
My friends and I have in the period prior to 1953 pointed out that this dream is utopian and have fought the easy money policy which would lead to the exaggeration of the boom.
The entrepreneurs try to expand their production because their profits rise under the influence of the inflationary demand.
The new money increases the demand, prices and profits rise further.
But the moment comes when the expectation of the continuation of the boom no longer gives a new stimulus to expand production.
Now there are no new layers of entrepreneurs or speculators who, by use of additional credits, could carry the boom further.
Now all enterprises have to be liquidated and all speculative positions have to be dissolved which were profitable only under inflation, i.e.
rising demand or prices.
The boom is followed by depression and this depression cannot be fought with the classical method of lowering the interest rate.
For, contrary to the cas~ in which the cycle was braked at an average level, in the case of the stabilization of the cycle at the highest level there is no more potential credit 'demand which has been left unsatisfied, because the interest rate was too high, and which can be satisfied after it has been lowered.
obligation to replace the failing demand of the private economy as soon as the boom recedes.
As long as effective demand can be held at its previous level by governmental deficit spending, full employment is considered as guaranteed.
The idea of concentrating governmental expenditures in times of depression in order to mitigate the fluctuations of the cycle is an old one..
If the State compensates the failing demand of the private sector of the economy, immediately, and not only after liquidation of the boom, it not only has to spend extraordinarily high amounts but the spending has also to be repeated permanently.
For a part of the amounts spent by the government trickles away by the building up of savings and has to be replaced by new governmental expenditures.
In all this we have not considered that under the prevailing political conditions there exists the further danger that wages are pushed upward during the depression in order to strengthen the purchasing power of the masses.
Republican Credit Policy I One of the chief objections of the Republicans to the Democratic economic policy was concerned with the permanent easy money policy of the New Dealers, which, it was argued, robbed the dollar THE ECONOMIC SITUATION'IN THE U.S.A. of 50 per cent of its purchasing power since 1939.
so far as they are concerned with economic policy, adhered ,unconditionally to the neo-classical conservative view described above, according to which the inflation should be curtailed immediately by an energetic increase in the cost of the credit supply.
Contrary to the opinion of most of the New Dealistic economists, according to whom raising of the interest rate has no effect in preventing inflation-an argument by which they had resisted every raising of the interest rate-the effect was strong and spontaneous.
The money circulation which had increased markedly for years, increased only negligibly.
The same applied to demand deposits.
Depression of Production without Deflation' Not so satisfCl;ctory, and for many quite unexpected, was the effect on production and employment.
When in the middle of 1953 the anti-inflationary effect of the interest rate policy materialized, production began to decline.
The index of production fell from about 138 to about 122 by March 1954.
These developments are almost uniformly described as cyclical in character and called, according to the mood of the observer, adjustment, recession, or depression; and diagnosed as a consequence of the deflation induced by the Republicans' monetary policy.
New Dealistic Keynesian economists, especially Professor Harris, demand the return of a policy of extreme cheap money which allegedly has brought so many years of magnificent prosperity.
However, what has been deflated are production and employment; prices have remained entirely constant and money circulation pretty much so, and total loans and investments by banks have even gone up substantially.
What had set in was an employment depression without a money deflation or, better, no depression at all-at least not a cyclical one.
A similar unemployment had been observed in Germany in the years 1926 to 1929.
At that time unemployment increased substantially, whereas the inflationary boom progressed until 1929.
Then, just as today, the reason can only have been that wages increased correspondingly more than prices and productivity.
Then, just as today, labor which had become too expensive was replaced by relatively cheap capital investments.
They contended that the high wages were made only partly tolerable by higher productivity, but for the greater part only by inflation.
The Dilemma of the Republicans What was to be done in view of this development in the realm of production and unemployment?
Conservative economists, wishing THE ECONOMIC SITUATION IN THE U.S.A. to prevent the resumption of inflation by all means, believed the only possible way of reducing unemployment was through an adjustment of costs to the price and demand level which now showed no signs of further inflation.
they demanded-in an utopian fashion perhaps-the reduction of wages to the level prevailing at the beginning of 1953, or at least their stabilization at the level of the moment, so that an increase of productivity would be able to absorb the wage rises which had taken place until then.
Keynesian New Dealistic economists demanded, as already mentioned, the immediate return to a policy of permanent easy money, and thus, consciously or unconsciously, to further inflation.
They demanded, therefore, the adjustment of the price and money level to the cost level, instead of conversely the adjustment of the latter to the former.
This demand was only the consequent 'expression of the Keynesian employment theory, or, as I would say, mythology.
For Keynesians do not consider employment, as neo-classical economists do, essentially a function of the propensity of the people to work but of the so-called effective monetary demand for products.
In order to increase or maintain employment, an increase of the monetary demand is considered necessary and sufficient.
Nor is the increase of the demand sufficient: even a strong inflation does not produce an increase of employment if wages go up with prices.
From the middle of the year 1953 the administration again followed a conscious easy-money policy which has lowered the yields of A.A.A.
bonds below the level prevailing at the beginning of 1953, with the characteristic result--very much reminiscent of the year 1927-0 an extraordinarily strong upward movement of the stock market.
But it is perhaps too much to demand that they remain faithful to it.
The population is through the Keynesian economists educated in the belief that unemployment is always the result of a failing demand for labor and never the result of a too expensive supply, so that not the wages but the monetary policy must be responsible.
The question is identical with the question of the future course of the business cycle in the United States.
To answer it means forecasting the future course of the cycle.
Reasons Suggesting a New Upswing I can, therefore, only.
express the opInIon to which my own business cycle feeling leans.
I think that the government will succeed in starting the inflationary credit expansion anew, and that under its influence unemployment will decrease substantially.s But my opinion is, as I want to stress again, purely subjective and possibly quite erroneous.
Although, in my opinion, all sins were committed which can be committed in matters of business cycle stabilization, it still was a stabilization somewhat at the average level of the cycle, as described above, and not at its highest level.
(2) Never until now have deep depressions set in at the moment when they were expected.
Now the average of the entrepreneurs in the United States have expected the coming of a depression for many years, and particularly since 1951.
Therefore, the so-called businesscycle consciousness has, by its dampening effect on the credit demand, compensated-at least partly-for the mistakes of the governmental credit supply policy; with the result that heavy exaggeration of the boom, and, thus, the danger of a deep depression no longer correctible through interest rate lowering, have.
The usual credit demand of a crisis, with its strongly rising interest rate, was not observed.
Employment did not fall off suddenly and commodity prices did not recede at all.
The slow decline of employment and production which could be observed was in contrast to the sudden interruption of production and dismissal of workers regularly observable at the beginning of a typical depression resulting from financial.
No Boom Will Last Eternally This optimism concerning the course of the cycle is, to put it quite clearly, no optimism for a very long period.
Nor would I like it to be thought that I approve of absorbing unemployment by methods coming very near to the New Dealist Keynesians.
we are all dead" is valid only for individuals and not for economies and nations.
Once all the reserves of the boom-of an objective and psychological nature-are exhausted, a depression will set in which it will be possible to mitigate only by the strongest governmental intervention.
