Higher productivity, therefore, leads not only to longer working time for individual workers, but also to the employment of more workers.
(3) At given productivity of labor, and hence given demand for labor, production can expand only if the supply price of labor decreases.
But if the production costs of A and B differ, exchange will take place as soon as they are no longer isolated from each other but able to exchange goods.
The workers deliver to the entrepreneurs not their products but their work, and it is the entrepreneurs who exchange the workers' work with nature.
The result will be that at the end of the production period the distribution of money among the entrepreneurs will be different from what it was at THE STATIONARY ECONOMY the beginning.
In a money economy, the money which the workers receive from their entrepreneurs in wages and spend for their living during any given production period does.
and the individual goods capital goods.
But even if there are no new savings, employment and production can' increase.
Amount of Capital and Roundabout Ways of Production Increase in production is not the only thing which causes the quantity of goods simultaneously present in an economy, the capital of the economy, to increase.
Production creates income for the factors of production, and the spending of this income leads to consumption.
What, on the other hand, will be the shape and level of the demand curve for credits, i.e. how much capital will be demanded at the various interest rates?
Capital will be saved and employed in production up to the point where the higher interest demanded for additional credits can no longer be paid by the entrepreneurs because the additional amounts of capital no longer increase productivity to a corresponding degree.
production into detours-leads to the production of goods.
We shall consider only two factors of production: first labor, including land as a carrier of services, for which the entrepreneur has to pay a price; and second money capital or credit, for which he has to pay interest.
The answer is that machines can never cost more than their production costs, for their number can be increased at will by payment of these costs.
Its services are fixed and are not influenced either by production costs or rates of COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS interest.
Now the demand for fixed capital is much more sensitive with respect to interest rates than is the demand for variable capital.
But because his unit costs have risen by d s-d4 , his costs are now c-f-d4-1 and his profits are not a-g-h-d s but f-g-h-d 4  All this is valid not only for each individual entrepreneur but also when the general price level fluctuates, as in inflation or deflation, for the whole economy, Le.
For what goods, for how many of them and by whom, will this money be spent in the consumption exchange to which we now turn?
As a result, a certain price level will be reached at which the supply of goods and monetary demand balance.
Equality of Production and Consumption The goods supplied during a production period for consumption or as intermediate and capital goods and the goods actually consumed or used as intermediate and capital goods are necessarily the same.
In a stationary economy an entrepreneur is certain of the demand for his products and of the resulting price conditions.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY (4) Profits can be made only by individual entrepreneurs and not by the economy as a whole.
In doing so we have to bear in mind that we are dealing with an economy in equilibrium: the economy is not subject to changes-in COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS particular the demand for and supply of capital, and therefore the interest rate, are constant.
On the assumption of constant circulation of money, all the money paid out during a production period to the factors of production must be spent on the resulting products.
To the extent to which demand for consumer goods falls owing to saving there will be a rise in the demand for capital goods and intermediate goods on the part of entrepreneurs, who get as credits such amounts as have been saved.
Changes in consumption can also be due to changes in production costs and resulting changes in prices.
Given a certain productivity of, and the resulting demand for labor, and given a certain supply of capital, the volume of total production is a function of the supply of labor.
COMMONSENSE ECONOMICS In the first instance it will be seen that if the labor supply curve 8 moves downward to 8 1 , employment increases by abo The increase in employment causes an increase in the product, but this increase in the product is smaller than the one resulting from the preceding additions to employment because the new workers, as explained above, have a lower productivity.
The answer is this: employment of new workers not only leads to a fall in the marginal productivity of labor; it leads at the same time to an increase in the marginal productivity of capital, since the demand for capital per worker becomes more urgent.
Changes in the Demand for Labor We have so far examined the effects of changes in the supply of labor at a given demand for labor.
Since, at the same time, the productivity of the workers has.
This increase is smaller than would correspond to the increase in productivity because the wages of all workers are in accordance with the productivity of the marginal worker.
Changes in the Productivity of Capital As we have stated earlier, changes in the productivity of capital are not to be confused with changes in the productivity of labor.
In a free' competitive economy the workers can benefit, from an increase in the productivity of capital only when the supply of capital grows at the same rate as the demand for capital and when, therefore, interest rates do not change.
If the increase in total output is due to an increase in the productivity of labor, wages go up, but less than would correspond to the increase in productivity.
If more labor is combined with the same amount of capital, the marginal productivity of labor and the wage level decrease.
If the greater employment of labor is due to an increase in the productivity of labor, the wage level does not fall absolutely, but only in relation to the higher productivity.
If interest rates rise,for instance, .because of higher demand for capital, more will be saved per unit of time.
But as higher real incomes are chiefly the result of higher productivity through increased use of capital, such higher income.s will not change the relative strength of demand for and supply of capital.
The effects of changes in demand for capital on interest rates, however, are opposite to those resulting from changes in supply.
The effects of changes in supply of and demand for capital on the amounts of capital used and on interest rates are demonstrated in Figure 19.
Changes "in Capital Supply and Demand Influence Demand for Labor We have described above how changes in the demand for and supply of labor give rise to induced changes in the demand for capital.
We have seen that when, for instance, the supply of or the demand for labor grows, the latter because of an increase in the productivity of labor, the demand for capital rises.
It follows that in so far as the supply of capital is not completely inelastic, i.e. in so far as capitalists are unwilling to supply the same amounts of capital at lower interest rates, both corporation taxes and personal taxes are bound to have a restricting effect on the use of capital.
When the use of capital increases owing to cheaper or increased supply of capital this is self-evident, because in this case the interest rate falls.
When the use of capital increases owing to higher productivity \of, and hence higher demand for, capital the interest rate rises, but the compensation per unit of capital nevertheless decreases relatively to the compensation of labor because for a given labor force wages rise more than interest per unit of capital.
But the increase in the share of capital is smaller than the increase in the use of capital.
It will lead to increased production-and thus to increased real investment or real consumption-only under one of the two conditions: Either the labor supply curve must remain stable in spite of rising prices-for any length of time an entirely unrealistic assumption of Keynes who maintains that the supply of labor is not a function of real wages (General Theory, p. 8); or labor supply must be perfectly elastic for a certain time, as in the special situation of the recovery phase of the business cycle.
3 Changes in Consumption and Investment do not Change Employment Unless changes in consumption and investment lead to inflation or deflation, they cannot have any influence on aggregate employment.
Employment never fluctuates if labor demands higher money wages when prices rise through inflation and is content with lower money wages when prices fall through deflation.
Here it suffices to state that as long as wage demands are fully adjusted to changes in the value of money inflation and deflation simply lead to, or are identical with, changes in the level of wages and prices but do not alter the employment level.
If interest rates decline owing to declining demand for or rising supply of capital, or if interest rates rise for the opposit~ reasons, this must have decisive effects on the prices of shares and bonds.
Therefore there will again be no changes in the prices for shares with variable dividend rates because the higher dividends are now capitalized at a higher interest rate.
The effects on share prices of such a reduction in demand for capital will, however, be somewhat different from those of declining demand for capital in general.
The effects on share prices of such.
When, for instance, the interest rates on the credit markets are higher than the bank rate, individuals and banks will sell bills and bonds to the Central Banks.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Effects of Inflation and Deflation on Employment The effects of inflationary credits 'are not limited to lengthening production detours.
Since the additional supply of inflationary credits lowers interest rates not only more capital but also more labor can be used.
It is important to note that if-but only if-no changes in the supply price of factors of production, especially labor and capital, occur simultaneously with credit inflation the latter's effects on capital structure as well as on employment are lasting.
The result is an increase in the prices of the products of the past period.
Entrepreneurs.
In the latter case the money increases the demand on the markets for consumption goods.
This is a Gorrect description of the effects of money and credit inflation of the current period (Period II) on the prices of goods produced in the past production period (Period I), in which inflation could not yet influence the volume of output.
The Demand for Products of the Current Production Period The effect of inflation on the prices of goods produced in the current production period (Period II) is much more complicated, because now not only the demand for, but also the supply of goods increases.
But, on the average, the price expectations of entrepreneurs will be higher than at the time of the production decisions for Period II.
This, again, means that the demand for credits with which to pay for capital goods, intermediate goods and wages rises in Period III, just as in the.
In this case the additional credits will increase only the use of capital but no longer the employment of labor.
The immediate adjustment of the economy to inflation is also often prevent~d by the fact that the amount of fixed capital cannot be increased as quickly as the .amount of variable capital.
In this case-which corresponds somewhat to the case of changing payment habits-an increase of the quantity of money by inflationary credit expansion has no influence on the general price level since the quantity of money appearing on the markets for goods in a certain period is not increased.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Cumulative Effect of the Original Inflation The second money inflation (in Period III) is caused, as we have seen, by the fact that the first inflation (in the current Period II) lifted the prices of goods produced in the past (Period I).
Entrepreneurs, experiencing for a protracted time that prices are higher at the end of each production period than they were at its beginning, will expect prices to rise again during the current period and will base their production decisions on these expectations.
Prices could no longer rise between the present and the future.
If the credit supply curve is S(n) and the demand curve D, supply and demand for credits balance at an interest rate of 5 per cent without the help of inflationary credits.
The same happens if the inflation is not due to greater or cheaper supply of credits by banks, but to a stronger demand THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION for credits.
If money.
Employment and production will not increase, and inflation will spend itself entirely on higher prices and not on higher employment and production.
For the increase in demand or prices must always be smaller than the increase in costs.
Even entrepreneurs and capitalistswhose income declines through the wage increases-had spent a part of what is now taken away from them.. Only if we assume that entrepreneurs pay higher wages immediately but curtail production only after some time could prices of or a demand for the products of the last period increase.
COMMON SE'NSE ECONOMICS Again, only if we assume, as is often done, that entrepreneurs would immediately lower wages but expand production only with substantial lags, could a deflationary effect on prices and demand for the products of the last period be expected.
All depends on what the entrepreneurs expect the effect of wage lowering to be on the demand and price situation-which again depends on whether they believe that production in further production periods, which produces the income to buy the products of the current period, will increase sufficiently so that the addition to total income will at least compensate the demand deficit resulting from the income shifts from the spenders to the savers.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION The End of Inflation Inflation stops when the Central Banks raise their discount rate to a level at which the inflation profits expected by entrepreneurs appear compensated by the higher cost of credit.
They follow from what has been said about inflation profits and loss~s, Share Prices in Inflation Share prices fluctuate around a level determined by dividends .on the one hand, and by interest rates on the other.
Interest Rates and Share Prices If the inflation is due to a fall in discount and interest rates, the rates at which dividends and the interests on long-term bonds are capitalized are altered.
However, even if inflation is due to increased credit demand, and interest rates therefore do not fall, inflation influences stock prices decisively for the following reason.
Should a demand for carry-over credits develop, interest rates will rise more in the first case, and decline less in the second.
Inflation and deflation result from changes in credit demand and supply, as described above in detail.
Why is the business cycle self-perpetuating?
But more important: if additional capital is applied in an economy, the structure of the economy changes once and for all.
At the beginning of every new production period entrepreneurs spend the same, now increased, amount of money on capital goods.
It was an "easy money depression."
If this were not so, any increase in credit demand or supply, for instance, would lead to a single and lasting credit and monetary expansion, but not first to inflation and then, as a reaction, to deflation.
THE BUSINESS CYCLE The answer is given by what we have said above in connection with psychological business cycle theories.
The End of the Boom Recovery, as we have seen, can start from changes in demand for credits as well as in th~ supply of credits.
During depression they fall later.
The new workers' additional demand for consumption goods, and the new entrepreneurs' additional demand for capital goods, are at least partly satisfied by this supply.
As we have seen such profits and losses are due to three reasons: the increase (or decrease) of prices; the lag of production costs such as wages, interest rates and rents behind rising (or falling) prices; and the increase (or decrease) of real debts through inflation or deflation.
Dividends fluctuate not only within each business cycle, but also from one cycle to another.
Price Inflation What have been the effects on the price level of such a credit and money inflation?
What had set in was an employment depression without a money deflation or, better, no depression at all-at least not a cyclical one.
