And then, instead of going up and up and up, crime began to fall.
It was ubiquitous, with every category of crime falling in every part of the country.
The teenage murder rate, instead of rising 100 percent or even 15 percent as James Alan Fox had warned, fell more than 50 percent within five years.
So had the rate of just about every other sort of crime, from assault to car theft.
All she had wanted was an abortion.
But in Texas, as in all but a few states at that time, abortion was illegal.
By this time, of course, it was far too late for Ms. McCorvey/Roe to have her abortion.
They were the very women whose children, if born, would have been much more likely than average to become criminals.
A real-estate agent is a different breed of expert than a criminologist, but she is every bit the expert.
That, in fact, is why you hired an expert.
And they use that advantage to help you, the person who hired them, get exactly what you want for the best price.
But in a different case, an expert’s incentives may work against you.
Using the data from the sales of those 100,000 Chicago homes, and controlling for any number of variables—location, age and quality of the house, aesthetics, whether or not the property was an investment, and so on—it turns out that a real-estate agent keeps her own home on the market an average of ten days longer and sells it for an extra 3-plus percent, or $10,000 on a $300,000 house.
Most people would agree that money has an undue influence on elections and that far too much money is spent on political campaigns.
Consider now the police/murder correlation in a pair of real cities.
1 What Do Schoolteachers and Sumo Wrestlers Have in Common?
But very often parents are late.
Economists love incentives.
They love to dream them up and enact them, study them and tinker with them.
But when it comes to crime, people also respond to moral incentives (they don’t want to do something they consider wrong) and social incentives (they don’t want to be seen by others as doing something wrong).
How might a teacher go about cheating?
The data also included some information about each teacher and demographic information for every student, as well as his or her past and future test scores—which would prove a key element in detecting the teacher cheating.
She is also more likely to cheat after her incentives change.
It was the teachers in the lowest-scoring classrooms who were most likely to cheat.
With street crime, meanwhile, that is not the case.
So what do the bagel data have to say?
(If a 2 percent gain in payment doesn’t sound like much, think of it this way: the nonpayment rate fell from 13 to 11 percent, which amounts to a 15 percent decline in theft.)
The second is the absence of a correlation between lynchings and Klan membership: there were actually more lynchings of blacks between 1900 and 1909, when the Klan was dormant, than during the 1920s, when the Klan had millions of members— which suggests that the Ku Klux Klan carried out far fewer lynchings than is generally thought.
Information is so powerful that the assumption of information, even if the information does not actually exist, can have a sobering effect.
Experts depend on the fact that you don’t have the information they do.
Or that you are so befuddled by the complexity of their operation that you wouldn’t know what to do with the information if you had it.
Consider now another true story of a real-estate agent’s information abuse.
The point here is not that real-estate agents are bad people, but that they simply are people—and people inevitably respond to incentives.
After all, agents and experts are people too—which suggests that we are likely to abuse information in our personal lives as well, whether by withholding true information or editing the information we choose to put forth.
Or think about how you might present yourself if you were going on national television for the first time.
Among economists, there are two leading theories of discrimination.
But if you can question something that people really care about and find an answer that may surprise them—that is, if you can overturn the conventional wisdom—then you may have some luck.
It would be silly to argue that the conventional wisdom is never true.
Consider the police.
At the very top of his list was crime.
That’s because they had different incentives.
He also had his business education, of course.
The 1960s and 1970s were, in retrospect, a great time to be a street criminal in most American cities.
And then there was the crime.
Compared to Romanian children born just a year earlier, the cohort of children born after the abortion ban would do worse in every measurable way: they would test lower in school, they would have less success in the labor market, and they would also prove much more likely to become criminals.
On that day, crime was just about at its peak in the United States.
Homicide fell at a greater rate during the 1990s than any other sort of crime, and a number of reliable studies have shown virtually no link between the economy and violent crime.
So even in a death penalty advocate’s best-case scenario, capital punishment could explain only one twenty-fifth of the drop in homicides in the 1990s.
So if you just look at raw correlations between police and crime, you will find that when there are more police, there tends to be more crime.
From 1960 to 1985, the number of police officers fell more than 50 percent relative to the number of crimes.
Homicide rates fell from 30.7 per 100,000 people in 1990 to 8.4 per 100,000 people in 2000, a change of 73.6 percent.
First, the drop in crime in New York began in 1990.
As argued above, an increase in the number of police, regardless of new strategies, has been proven to reduce crime.
By a conservative calculation, this huge expansion of New York’s police force would be expected to reduce crime in New York by 18 percent relative to the national average.
In other words, guns do not cause crime.
One study found that more than 25 percent of the homicides in New York City in 1988 were crack-related.
All told, the crash of the crack market accounted for roughly 15 percent of the crime drop of the 1990s—a substantial factor, to be sure, though it should be noted that crack was responsible for far more than 15 percent of the crime increase of the 1980s.
Even when controlling for the income, age, education, and health of the mother, the researchers found that these children too were more likely to become criminals.
One study has shown that the typical child who went unborn in the earliest years of legalized abortion would have been 50 percent more likely than average to live in poverty; he would have also been 60 percent more likely to grow up with just one parent.
In other words, the very factors that drove millions of American women to have an abortion also seemed to predict that their children, had they been born, would have led unhappy and possibly criminal lives.
Perhaps the most dramatic effect of legalized abortion, however, and one that would take years to reveal itself, was its impact on crime.
One way to test the effect of abortion on crime would be to measure crime data in the five states where abortion was made legal before the Supreme Court extended abortion rights to the rest of the country.
Between 1988 and 1994, violent crime in the early-legalizing states fell 13 percent compared to the other states; between 1994 and 1997, their murder rates fell 23 percent more than those of the other states.
One factor to look for would be a correlation between each state’s abortion rate and its crime rate.
Since 1985, states with high abortion rates have experienced a roughly 30 percent drop in crime relative to low-abortion states.
The crime drop was, in the language of economists, an “unintended benefit” of legalized abortion.
Indeed, there are plenty of people who consider abortion itself to be a violent crime.
However a person feels about abortion, a question is likely to come to mind: what are we to make of the trade-off of more abortion for less crime?
This is nothing but a thought exercise—obviously there is no right answer—but it may help clarify the impact of abortion on crime.
Fifteen thousand lives: that happens to be about the same number of people who die in homicides in the United States every year.
Molly’s parents know that Amy’s parents keep a gun in their house, so they have forbidden Molly to play there.
Still, the question of how much parents matter is a good one.
The ECLS measured the students’ academic performance and gathered typical survey information about each child: his or her race, gender, family structure, socioeconomic status, the level of his or her parents’ education, and so on.
Each switch represents a single category of the child’s data: his first-grade math score, his third-grade math score, his first-grade reading score, his third-grade reading score, his mother ’s education level, his father ’s income, the number of books in his home, the relative affluence of his neighborhood, and so on.
After controlling for just a few variables—including the income and education level of the child’s parents and the mother ’s age at the birth of her first child—the gap between black and white children is virtually eliminated at the time the children enter school.
The data reveal that black children who perform poorly in school do so not because they are black but because a black child is more likely to come from a low-income, low-education household.
First of all, because the average black child is more likely to come from a low-income, low-education household, the gap is very real: on average, black children still are scoring worse.
The typical white child in the ECLS study attends a school that is only 6 percent black; the typical black child, meanwhile, attends a school that is about 60 percent black.
Just how are the black schools bad?
Now, two by two: Matters: The child has highly educated parents.
She is also likely to want a child more than a teenage mother wants a child.
A child with English-speaking parents does better in school than one whose parents don’t speak English.
Parents who are well educated, successful, and healthy tend to have children who test well in school; but it doesn’t seem to much matter whether a child is trotted off to museums or spanked or sent to Head Start or frequently read to or plopped in front of the television.
But this is not to say that parents don’t matter.
And black parents give their children names that are starkly different from white children’s.
Even more remarkably, nearly 30 percent of the black girls are given a name that is unique among the names of every baby, white and black, born that year in California.
More than 40 percent of the white babies are given names that are at least four times more common among whites.
In one recent ten-year stretch, each of these names was given to at least two thousand babies in California—fewer than 2 percent of them black.
So what are the “whitest” names and the “blackest” names?
Along those same lines, perhaps a black person with a white name pays an economic penalty in the black community; and what of the potential advantage to be gained in the black community by having a distinctively black name?
The data show that, on average, a person with a distinctively black name—whether it is a woman named Imani or a man named DeShawn—does have a worse life outcome than a woman named Molly or a man named Jake.
Not, that is, the actual source of the name—that much is usually obvious: there’s the Bible, there’s the huge cluster of traditional English and Germanic and Italian and French names, there are princess names and hippie names, nostalgic names and place names.
Then there are the invented names.
But keep in mind that these are the most common names of all, and consider the size of the data set.
A caution to prospective parents who are shopping for a “smart” name: remember that such a name won’t make your child smart; it will, however, give her the same name as other smart kids—at least for a while.
Consider the ten most popular names given to black baby boys in California in 1990 and then in 2000.
You might want to compare these names with the “Most Popular White Girl Names” list, which includes the top ten overall names from 1980 and 2000.
The lower-end parents, meanwhile, go looking for the next name that the upper-end parents have broken in.
Where, then, will the new high-end names come from?
What the California names data suggest is that an overwhelming number of parents use a name to signal their own expectations of how successful their children will be.
