But this freedom may come at a price.
Second, we have a tendency to look around at what others are doing and use them as a standard of comparison.
Even if I made what I was sure was the right choice for her, I could not live with the guilt if something went wrong .
Though as many as 65 percent of people surveyed say that if they were to get cancer, they would want to choose their own treatment, in fact, among people who do get cancer, only 12 percent actually want to do so.
And what makes it overwhelming is not only that the decision is ours, but that the number of sources of information from which we are to make the decisions has exploded.
And this means that whether or not we work has become a matter of hour-by-hour, minute-by-minute choice.
Whom we married was a matter of choice, but we knew that we would do it as soon as we could and have children, because that was something all people did.
His point was that everything in life is choice.
If it were up to us to choose whether or not to have choice, we would opt for choice almost every time.
You have to pick a restaurant, a CD, or a movie, and you make these choices based upon how you expect the experiences to make you feel.
But more than anything else, we get information from advertising.
But we need to know that the information is reliable, and we need to have enough time to get through all the information thats available.
In the end, they are likely to get less satisfaction out of the exquisite choices they make than will satisficers.
The more they agreed, the more they were maximizers.
A final questionnaire measured depression, and asked people how sad they felt, how much satisfaction they got out of various activities, how much interest they had in other people, and what they thought of their appearance, among other things.
If youre a satisficer and you choose something thats good enough to meet your standards, you are less likely to care if something better is just around the corner.
Its hard to go through life regretting every decision you make because it might not have been the best possible decision.
What is even worse is that you can actually experience regret in anticipation of making a decision.
If I make a choice and it turns out well, I still feel like something of a failure if I find out that another choice would have turned out better.
Satisficers may have very high standards.
You will not experience the kind of satisfaction with your choices that satisficers will.
I second-guess myself, and I often regret my decision, not because it turns out badly, but because I suspect that a different decision might have turned out better.
In fact, the more options there are, the more likely When Only the Best Will Do | 93 it is that the satisficer will find one that meets his or her standards.
They might be aware that they have trouble making decisions and that they fear they will regret decisions and that they often derive little lasting satisfaction from the decisions they have made, but all with no conscious awareness of what is at the root of the problem.
If this is true, then the proliferation of options not only makes people who are maximizers miserable, but it may also make people who are satisficers into maximizers.
Or maybe even I wear what I want and I dont care what you think about it.
104 | The Paradox of Choice The first is that, as the experience of choice and control gets broader and deeper, expectations about choice and control may rise to match that experience.
The choice of when to be a chooser may be the most important choice we have to make.
Then can it be that freedom of choice is not all its cracked up to be?
So by using rules, presumptions, standards, and routines to constrain ourselves and limit the decisions we face, we can make life more manageable, which gives us more time to devote ourselves to other people and to the decisions that we cant or dont want to avoid.
Apparently we always think we want choice, but when we actually get it, we may not like it.
The necessity of making trade-offs alters how we feel about the decisions we face; more important, it affects the level of satisfaction we experience from the decisions we ultimately make.
Every choice we make has opportunity costs associated with it.
If we assume that opportunity costs take away from the overall desirability of the most-preferred option and that we will feel the opportunity costs associated with many of the options we reject, then the more alternatives there are from which to choose, the greater our experience of the opportunity costs will be.
And the greater our experience of the opportunity costs, the less satisfaction we will derive from our chosen alternative.
Once again, this suggests that whenever we are forced to make decisions involving trade-offs, we will feel less good about the option we choose than we would have if the alternatives hadnt been there.
We just dont want to have to evaluate trade-offs ourselves.
Because we dont put rejected options out of our minds, we Missed Opportunities | 133 experience the disappointment of having our satisfaction with decisions diluted by all the options we considered but did not choose.
Some years ago, when my wife and I made a trip to Paris for a long weekend, I had an experience that I couldnt understand until I began to write this chapter.
This created a problem for me, especially when I had to be the one to choose a movie that my family or friends would watch together.
With fewer options and more constraints, many trade-offs would be eliminated, and there would be less self-doubt, less of an effort to justify decisions, more satisfaction, and less second-guessing of the decisions once made.
the question people asked themselves was more like Should I take it or leave it?
However, those who had the option to change their minds were less satisfied with their choices than participants who did not have that option.
Indeed, I believe that one of the reasons that maximizers are less happy, less satisfied with their lives, and more depressed than satisficers is precisely because the taint of trade-offs and opportunity costs washes out much that should be satisfying about the decisions they make.
: The Problem of Regret  A NYTIME YOU MAKE A DECISION AND IT DOESNT TURN OUT WELL or you find an alternative that would have turned out better, youre a candidate for regret.
The only way to be sure that you wont regret a decision is by making the best possible decision.
And once again, the more options you have, the more likely it is that you will experience regret, either in anticipation of decisions or after them.
What is important about this picture is that the more that our experiences result from our own choices, the more regret we will feel if things dont turn out as we had hoped.
So although adding options may make it easier for us to choose something we really like, it will also make it easier for us to regret choices that dont live up to our hopes or expectations.
A Regret and Satisfaction S WE HAVE SEEN, REGRET WILL MAKE US FEEL WORSE AFTER DECI- sionseven ones that work outthan we otherwise would, especially when we take opportunity costs into consideration.
If only they had better restaurants there, it would have been perfect.
: The Problem of Regret | 157 who are maximizers than for people who are satisficers.
And so on.
Studies like this show that not only is regret an important consequence of many decisions, but that the prospect of regret is an important cause of many decisions.
When considering a decision involving complex possibilities, the fact that there is no one option that is best in all respects will induce people to consider the opportunity costs associated with choosing the best option.
And with each if only you generate will come a little more regret and a little less satisfaction with the choice you actually made.
Because so many of the decisions we make have consequences for others, a If Only .
In this case it is hedonic adaptation, or adaptation to pleasure.
Even though we dont expect it to happen, such adaptation to pleasure is inevitable, and it may cause more disappointment in a world of many choices than in a world of few.
And if you had asked accident victims how happy they were right after they suffered their disability, they would have been as low as can be.
So the more choices we have, the more effort goes into our decisions, and the more we expect to enjoy the benefits of those decisions.
It should also be obvious that the phenomenon of adaptation will have more profound effects on people who set out to maximize than it will on people who are aiming for good enough.
And so it is maximizers who will be most disappointed when they discover the pleasure they derive from their decisions to be short-lived.
While we dont get to do and to have everything we want, no other people on earth have ever had such control over their lives, such material abundance, and such freedom of choice.
Factoring in adaptation may help us be satisfied with choices that are good enough rather than the best, and this in turn will reduce the time and effort we devote to making those choices.
For purposes of making decisions about what to do in the future, the Was it good or bad?
question is less important than How good or bad was it?
What contributes to high expectations, above and beyond the quality of past experience, is, I think, the amount of choice and control we now have over most aspects of our lives.
Because of this, and because of the role played by expectations in hedonic evaluations, an experience that is on the positive side of the hedonic thermometer for a satisficer may be on the negative side for a maximizer.
We probably can do more to affect the quality of our lives by controlling our expectations than we can by doing virtually anything else.
People can compare themselves with others who have done better (upward social comparison) or worse (downward social comparison).
We have less control over social comparison.
If you live in a social world, as we all do, you are always being hit with information about how others are doing.
They were asked to choose between 12 years of education (high school) when others have 8, and 16 years of education (college) when others have 20.
But even if people could be taught to care less about status, they would still not be satisfied with what they have, because they have legitimate reasons for believing that no matter how much a person has, it may not be enough.
We found that maximizers were much more affected by the presence of another person than satisficers were.
The social comparison information had no such effect on satisficers.
They were more attentive than satisficers to what other people were buying, and more influenced in judgments of their own satisfaction by the apparent satisfaction of others.
Maximizers want the best, but how do you know that you have the best, except by comparison?
Satisficers who are looking for results that are good enough can use the experiences of others to help them determine exactly what good enough is, but they dont Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 199 have to.
It is maximizers who have the relative standards and satisficers who have the absolute ones.
W Choice Options and Social Comparison E HAVE ALREADY SEEN HOW THE MORE OPTIONS WE HAVE, THE more difficulty we have gathering the information necessary to make a good decision.
The more difficult information gathering 200 | The Paradox of Choice is, the more likely it is that you will rely on the decisions of others.
But the more social comparison you do, the more likely you are to be affected by it, and the direction of such effects tends to be negative.
So by forcing us to look around at what others are doing before we make decisions, the world of bountiful options is encouraging a process that will often, if not always, leave us feeling worse about our decisions than we would if we hadnt engaged in the process to begin with.
And I can do it again whenever I want.
With all the choice available, we should never have to settle for things that are just good enough.
In the last chapter we saw that the amount of pleasure and satisfaction we derive from experience has as much to do with how the experience relates to expectations as it does with the qualities of the experience itself.
The key fact about psychological life in societies in which you have little control over these aspects of life is that you also have little expectation of control.
Do they have less control than the rest of us compared to what they expect?
As they do in regard to missed opportunities, regret, adaptation, and social comparison, maximizers will suffer more from high expectations and self-blame than will satisficers.
Maximizers will put the most work into their decisions and have the highest expectations about the results of those decisions, and thus will be the most disappointed.
This exercise may help you better appreciate the costs associated with the decisions you make, which may lead you to give up some decisions altogether or at least to establish rules of thumb for yourself about how many options to consider, or how much time and energy to invest in choosing.
As you go through the exercise of reviewing recent choices youve made, not only will you become more aware of associated costs, youll discover that there are some things you really care about, and others you dont.
It is maximizers who worry most about regret, about missed opportunities, and about social comparisons, and it is maximizers who are most disappointed when the results of decisions are not as good as they expected.
It makes regret less likely.
To become a satisficer, however, requires that you think carefully 226 | The Paradox of Choice about your goals and aspirations, and that you develop well-defined standards for what is good enough whenever you face a decision.
When we decide to opt out of deciding in some area of life, we dont have to think about opportunity costs.
Because satisficers have their own standards for what is good enough, they are less dependent than maximizers on comparison among alternatives.
There are some strategies you can use to help you avoid the disappointment that comes from thinking about opportunity costs: 1.
