Yet for all its simplicity it shows quite clearly certain THE STATIONARY ECONOMY v fundamental facts about the economic world which we will encounter again and again as we proceed to the examination of the more complicated real conditions: (1) Production never expands beyond the point where the worker demands more for his work-hour than he produces during this work-hour.
The answer depends on the one hand upon his valuation of the relative utilities of pears and apples, and on the other hand upon the relative production costs of apples and pears.
When the choice is between work and rest, the utility of the products of work is, as we have seen, valued exactly according to the law of diminishing marginal utility: the utility of additional apples appears less as their number increases.
Our man might, for instance, consider the utility of the first 5 pears as equivalent to that of 15 apples (1 pear = 3 apples); the utility of the next 5 pears as equivalent to that of 10 apples (1 pear = 2 apples); and the utility of the next 5 pears as equivalent to that of 5 apples (1 pear = 1 apple).
The position of the intersection points between the demand curve and the three supply curves immediately provides the answer to the question COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS of how many pears and apples will be produced on our various assumptions.
If all made the same value judgments and produced goods at the same costs-meaning, in our simplified model, that each producer would be devoting the same number of hours of work to the production of the same goods as every other producerthen the output of all producers would have the same composition.
The demand curve Db of producer Bruns to the right of the former demand curve D. THE STATIONARY ECONOMY We can now immediately see how many apples and pears A and B produce, if we assume that the production costs of apples and pears are the same <supply curve 8 1), and if we also assume that the original work-rest choice remains valid, i.e. that each works the number of work-hours that is required for the production of 50 apples.
Even though the production costs of pears, in terms of apples, are the same for both, differences in taste have resulted in a different proportion of pears to apples in each of the two producers' total output.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY Exchange of Goods So long as both A and B produce at the same cost, each sacrificing the same number of working hours for the same quantity of the same product, no exchange takes place between A and B no matter how different their individual relative valuations of apples and pears may be.
We showed that in the case of the single producer an increase in output can never be considered a profit, because his entire output of goods is always the, exact result of his input of labor, regardless of the size of the output per unit of input.
The term profit could now have two meanings: (a) it could mean a surplus accruing to the whole two-man community of producers, a profit for their national economy, so to speak; (b) it could also mean a surplus accruing to one of the producers by an altered distribution of output, a private advantage for one individual producer over the other.
In the real world the greater productivity of the work done is not generally due to some special quality of the worker, but of the enterprise in which he works.
If it were the difference in the workers' THE STATIONARY ECONOMY efficiency which leads to the differential of 30 pears, the wage of worker A would have to be 50 pears, and that of worker B 80 pears.
It enables anyone member of the community to dispose of his goods to any other member, regardless of whether the latter produces anything the first wants; the money received enables him to get the equivalent in goods he wants from a third person.
The result will be that at the end of the production period the distribution of money among the entrepreneurs will be different from what it was at THE STATIONARY ECONOMY the beginning.
9 When the entrepreneurs of the past period sell their products to the workers of the present period, the money they receive enables them to repay their loans and thus to free themselves from their debts to the capitalists.
We must sharply distinguish between the question: is the volume of production dependent upon capital accumulation; THE STATIONARY ECONOMY and the reverse question: is the amount of capital dependent on the volume of production?
If more is produced, other things being equal, there is an increase in the amount of capital, i.e. in the amount of goods simultaneously present in the economy-or, better, of goods which reach the future from the!
Amount of Capital and Roundabout Ways of Production Increase in production is not the only thing which causes the quantity of goods simultaneously present in an economy, the capital of the economy, to increase.
It starts not with the current work of the worker using the machine but with THE STATIONARY ECONOMY the production of the machine itself, and it ends not with the goods completed currently with the help of the machine but with the last goods which the machine is still able to turn out.
But suppose the workers, or other factors of production who would in the ordinary course of events spend their income on consumption, decide to save and to put the savings at the disposal of the entrepreneurs: then the entrepreneurs would be able to buy capital goods with the money otherwise spent on consumption.
The deepening of the capital structure, the lengthening of PERIOD II PERIOD I PERIOD III Production of capital goods Worker (consumer) Capital goods , ..... ," .... ~ Production of consumer goods , L Capital goods Worker (consumer) " ..... ;: ..... , ;< ---- Consumer goods " "" ..... , -~ Worker ~:~sumer) Capital goods " ..... ... .... ~ .... A" ..... ..... ~ --~ I I ----to), / " ..... l Capital goods Capital goods " .... ----- Consumer goods .... "" .- "" .... ..... * ..... "" ..... ..... f --~ caPi:; goods Movement of money Movement of goods FIG.
II Consumer goods THE STATIONAAY ECONOMY production detours, lead to increased production not by the employment of more workers but by an increase in the productivity of the single worker., Work spent on building and then on using a machine yields technically higher results than work applied immediately to the production of the end product.
If labor were the only factor of production, work would be put into production up to the point where the money received for the work is no longer considered equivalent to the sacrifice of leisure.
Weare thus led to the important conclusion that, given an unchanged demand situation, a reduction in the individual worker's share in the result of production is accompanied by an increase of the total product, whereas an increase in his share would entail a reduction of the total product-except under quite unrealistic assumptions concerning the' elasticity of demand for labor and the elasticity of supply of other production factors.
We shall see again and again the working of this peculiar law, according to which changes in the remuneration of one factor of production lead to opposite changes in the volume of the total product.
If the next extension of production detours would again increase the product by the same amount, the entrepreneurs would again be prepared to pay interest corresponding to the wages of three workers.
The law states that, given a certain amount of one factorlabor for instance-the addition of every further unit of the other factor-e.g. capital-increases the productivity of the first factor, but in a decreasing degree.
The validity of this law will readily be understood if we consider that an amount of capital applied to labor, for instance in, the form of a hammer, is likely to raise the productivity of labor much more than the same amount of capital used for the last refinement of a capitalistic process.
It should be noted in this connection that the question of combination of capital and labor is not identical with the question of the optimum size of the plant.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY Production Factors are Remunerated according to their Marginal Utility It is sometimes said that the distribution of the proceeds of production takes place according to the contribution of the factors of production to the total product.
The marginal productivity of capital determines not only the amount of capital used at a given supply of capital; it also determines what part of the total product is branched off and accrues to the capitalists in the form of interest payments.
only between two totally different kinds of costs: on the one hand the annually recurring interest they pay for the money they borrow, and on the other hand the prices they pay, once only, for labor, capital goods or land bought with the borrowed money.
The Price of the Services of Land There remains, of course, the question of the pricing of land.
Given a certain area of land and certain amounts of labor, every addition of land for cultivation will increase the productivity of the existing workers and thus replace workers, just as every additional worker will increase the productivity of the existing land and thus replace land.
Entrepreneurs will obviously be prepared to bid for the service of every additional unit of land an amount as high as the wages of the workers that the addition of this unit can replace.
THE STATIONARY ECONOMY In so far as the services of land are perpetual, the price of land would obviously have to be infinitely high, were it not for the fact that the purchase price is paid in money and that money if lent as credit also yields a perpetual service, namely the interest the lender goes on receiving.
Thus the price of land must stabilize at the point where the interest on the purchase price is equal to the price of the service the land renders during a certain period.
One has to compare the present utility of the money on the one hand and that of the annual services of the land on the other.
But since in the long run money lent as credit and money invested in land must offer the same yield, the price of land must stabilize at a level where the interest on the purchase price equals the price of the services.
Land Prices, Wages and Interest Rates We have so far examined what determines the value of the services of land and its price on the assumption that the number of workers and the amount of investable funds are given.
In the former case the product of labor is fully consumed only when the machine is worn out; in the latter case labor-including work for the production of raw materials fed to the machine-is as a rule consumed not long after input.
On the one hand, there is the problem of the combination of variable and fixed capital generally, and, on the other, the combination of variable and fixed capital frozen into certain forms.
As regards the first problem we must remember that work as such can always be applied to simple and relatively inexpensive as well as to complicated and relatively expensive machinery, and that raw materials can be transformed into goods with the help of the former as well as of the latter.
The Size of the Firm Not to be confused with the problem of the best combination of variable and fixed capital is the problem of the optimum size of the firm, that is of how many units of combinations of fixed and variable capital should be joined together physically and / or financially in one place or under one management.
The first thing to note is that, provided there is no interruption in the flow of money, all t4e money present in the economy must be spent on all the products coming to the markets.
This is the starting point of the famous so-called quantity theory of money, which deals with the relation between the quantity of circulating money and the price level.
It is assumed that land is bought in the same manner as capital goods and that its contribution to production is, therefore, rewarded by the interest paid to the capitalists who have lent the money for the purchase.
The Purchase of Intermediate Goods The factors of production receiving money in the production exchange for their contributions to production spend this money in the consumption exchange for the goods of the past period in order to consume them and to survive during the current period.
On the other hand the purchase of intermediate goods belongs to the category of the production exchange inasmuch as the products of past labor are not consumed immediately but directed into the longer production detours, so that their consumption does not take place in the current period but together with that of the labor of the current period in a later period.
For the money paid by each entrepreneur to the factors of production represents a certain percentage of the total money stock of the economy and thus attracts the same percentage of productive forces into his enterprise.
(1) Profits in the sense we use the word-in accordance with the definition of Schumpeter and Knight but contrary to the business man's notion-does not include the return on the capital used and the compensation for managerial services.
If, due to a change in taste, more of one product and less of another is wanted on the markets, the price of the first product will go up, the price of the second will go down.
Thus a sharp distinction must be made between the resulting stationary benefits and the temporary profits made by individual entrepreneurs who deprive the production factors of the benefits of the productivity increase and keep these profits for themselves.. Profits are interpersonal shifts of income; they are private in character and do not concern the national economy as such.
What the misdirection of production has accomplished is only that the final distribution of the total product of the economy does not coincide with the initial distribution of wealth.
The owners of the hotel have lost to others their claim to the products of a certain amount of work because they overestimated the demand for the product of their investment.
The rent paid for the use of land is, in principle, always THE STATIONARY ECONOMY equal to the value of the services of the land.
The fact that long-term investments are worth par and that their yields, i.e. their interest payments as a percentage of their price, are always equal to the interest rate paid for credits, is important for the understanding of the price formation of securities.
But the fate of an economy in the long run, in the aggregate over time, must be the concern of the economist at least as much as short-run situations.
It shows what happens when, in the further course of an inflation, all members of the community have become fully aware of what is going on and have adjusted their supply and demand for goods and services to the diminishing value of money.
But after some time the productive resources of the economy are again directed toward the production of various goods according to the new wishes of "the consumers.
The production of all goods expands up to the point at which the consumers are prepared to pay a price covering the cost of the last unit produced.
Given a certain productivity of, and the resulting demand for labor, and given a certain supply of capital, the volume of total production is a function of the supply of labor.
This is true in spite of the fact that labor unions, which minimize the importance of the wage level for the level of unemployment, generally do not admit it and in spite of the fact that this importance, unbelievable as it may appear, was hardly ever mentioned in the vast literature on post-war unemployment.
13 Changes in the Supply of Labor Changes in the supply of labor, as of all other goods, can take either of two forms: either the price for the same quantity changes, or the quantity offered for the same price.
The rise in wage demands, expressed by an upward shift of the .supply curve to 8 2 , will restrict employment only by ac; an equivalent reduction in work offered, expressed by a shift to the left of the supply curve to 8 1 , will restrict employment by the much larger amount abo Changes in the supply of labor may, but need not, lead to changes in the number of workers employed.
Whether the higher cost or the reduction of the supply of labor will actually lead to unemployment or not depends on the manner in which either the offer of weekly work-hours at prevailing wages is reduced or the) wage demands raised.
Indeed, economic -history shows examples both of higher wages and of reductions in the weekly working time, as well as of curtailment -of the degree of activity of the population (elimination of child labor, to a large extent of women's labor).
It only shows the curtailing effect of such laws on production, against which have to be weighed the favorable effects on the health and the general well-being of those remaining in employment and of those now unemployed.
In principle, its effect is a general increase in the price of too cheap labor, and therefore an upward bending of the left side of the supply curve (8) in Figure 16 to, say, a point X which is higher than the free market price of labor.
The result is a raising of the wage level, i.e. an improvement in the situation of those employed (ab) to the detriment of those who become unemployed (be) because their services are no longer demanded at the new, higher, wage THE CHANGING ECONOMY level.
The Demand Curve for Labor The effects of changes in labor supply are, of course, largely dependeIit upon how much of the labor offered at various prices entrepreneurs are able to employ, Of, in the language of curve analysis, on the shape of the demand curve for labor.
We have in principle to start from the fact mentioned in Part I that, according to the law of diminishing marginal returns, the productivity of the individual worker-given a certain amount of capital-is reduced through the employment of new workers, because the capital equipment per worker becomes scantier.
COMMONSENSE ECONOMICS In the first instance it will be seen that if the labor supply curve 8 moves downward to 8 1 , employment increases by abo The increase in employment causes an increase in the product, but this increase in the product is smaller than the one resulting from the preceding additions to employment because the new workers, as explained above, have a lower productivity.
The answer is this: employment of new workers not only leads to a fall in the marginal productivity of labor; it leads at the same time to an increase in the marginal productivity of capital, since the demand for capital per worker becomes more urgent.
The productivity of labor increases when technical improvements enable savings of labor in proportion to the amount of labor applied; the productivity of capital increases when such improvements enable savings of labor in proportion to the amount of capital applied.
In a free' competitive economy the workers can benefit, from an increase in the productivity of capital only when the supply of capital grows at the same rate as the demand for capital and when, therefore, interest rates do not change.
Unless the supply of capital has risen to the extent of the increased demand for capital, the enforcement of higher wages is bound to give rise to unemployment.
Every change in the supply of or the demand for one factor of production, e.g. labor, does more than just lead to a change in the employment of that factor and thus to a change in the total product.
Unless other factors, e.g. capital, change to the same extent, any such change in the total product is always accompanied by a change in the distribution of the product among the factors of production.
No distinction is made between increases in the income of individuals compared to the income of other individuals, and increases in the income of the whole community; nor is one made in the latter between short-run, especially cyclical, and long-run changes.
The community's traditional standard of living, which puts a brake on the present consumption of the newly rich, does not operate when the standard of living and, with it, consumption habits of the whole community change.
The fears of the so-called stagnation school, which since the publication of Keynes' General Theory has been alarming the world with the assertion that savings will outrun investment opportunities, are obviously unfounded both when based on an increase in the savings rate and on an absolute increase in saviBgs.
We have seen that when, for instance, the supply of or the demand for labor grows, the latter because of an increase in the productivity of labor, the demand for capital rises.
If, for instance, a corporation has to pay taxes in the amount of 50 per cent of its revenue from capital, it will obviously be able to offer only half the compensation for the use of capital-at least against common and preferred shares-that it could offer without the tax.
In the case of a 50 per cent income tax the capitalist will, in principle, offer the entrepreneur the same amount of capital, and the entrepreneurcapitalist will employ his own capital, only at twice the interest.
It follows that in so far as the supply of capital is not completely inelastic, i.e. in so far as capitalists are unwilling to supply the same amounts of capital at lower interest rates, both corporation taxes and personal taxes are bound to have a restricting effect on the use of capital.
To the extent to which wages fall as a result of smaller capital equipment, or fail to rise as much as they would have done otherwise, the burden of the tax is shifted on to the workers.
Very high income taxes must have serious consequences for production and employment, unless the State were to take over the role of the private investor, in one form or another, in accordance with the predictions of Keynes and the wishes of socialists and communists.
Changes in Use of Capital Coupled to Changes in Income Distribution We again encounter the law mentioned above, according to which the use of a factor of production-and thus the total output-and the distribution of income are linked to each other.
When the use of capital increases owing to higher productivity \of, and hence higher demand for, capital the interest rate rises, but the compensation per unit of capital nevertheless decreases relatively to the compensation of labor because for a given labor force wages rise more than interest per unit of capital.
Whereas the compensation of the capitalist per unit of capital employed declines with greater use of capital, the compensation for the whole of the, now, larger capital employed nevertheless increases, although not proportionally to the increase in the capital employed.
It will lead to increased production-and thus to increased real investment or real consumption-only under one of the two conditions: Either the labor supply curve must remain stable in spite of rising prices-for any length of time an entirely unrealistic assumption of Keynes who maintains that the supply of labor is not a function of real wages (General Theory, p. 8); or labor supply must be perfectly elastic for a certain time, as in the special situation of the recovery phase of the business cycle.
The assumption of an unchanging price level needs to be qualified when more labor is employed owing to an increased supply of labor or capital, i.e. when the stream of goods in THE CHANGING ECONOMY the economy is widened.
Unless, then, the money simultaneously present in the economy is increased, or unless its velocity of circula~ion increases, the money will not be sufficient to payout all the credits which ought to be available according to the savings situation.
In this connection, too, an increase of money is often demanded; the volume of money should be adjusted to the increase in the volume of 'goods due to the higher productivity.
The other alternative, namely deflation of the price level at constant wages, meets with the resistance particularly of the debtor class, which incurs losses if the prices of its inventories fall while its monetary debts remain the same.
Exactly the same happened in Germany during the years 1926 and 1929, when in an inflationary environment-created by cheap foreign loans-many millions became unemployed as much as two years before the deflation of 1929.4 Many New Dealers and Keynesians believe, in accordance with certain theses in Keynes' General Theory, that too high wages not only do not prevent full employment but actually raise the level of employment by increasing demand for goods and thus for labor.
At the same time, however, a new segment of the future appears on the horizon of time..Again, guesses about the future have to be made; again there are possibilities of error, and again possibilities of making profits by avoiding errors.
In statistical works on the distribution of income the statement is often found that profits are stable in the longrun, in the sense that the percentage of national income distributed as profits does not change over long periods.
If, on the other hand, capital invested in enterprises yields more than previouslY,for instance because the productivity of capital has increased, then the earnings of the companies will rise and so will the interest rate.
The prices of shares of the former enterprises will for a certain time remain below the prices of shares of the latter, except if they have covered their long term capital needs at the previous, lower, rates of interest.
It is a well-known fact that during the 1940s the yields of common stocks in the U.S. increased on the average, whereas the yields on bonds declined: the margin between bond and share yields widened substantially.
The Myth of the Small Death Traps The appearance and disappearance of money out of and into private hoards can also be regarded as a change in the velocity of money turnover.
The factual assumptions underlying this reasoning are, like so many others in modern theory, entirely unrealistic.1 Interest rates on the one hand, and investment and consumption decisions on the other, 'influence each other, but they by no means determine the amount of cash the business community and private individuals keep in their office safes or at home.
In a world with changing rates the large death traps are, therefore, opened by the unwillingness or inability of the Central Banks to adjust their rates to the market rates so quickly that neither purchases from nor sales to the Central Banks are made.
The relative stability and rigidity of the bank rate is, therefore, in the last instance the cause of the instability and flexibility of the monetary system.
This lag is mainly caused by the inability of Central Banks to recognize the inflationary or deflationary character of the economic situation in time, and -in the case of inflation-also by the unpopularity of restrictivemonetary policies.
Budget surpluses may even coincide with inflation) when the increase in credit demand from the private sector of the economy exceeds the increase in credit supply due to the repayment of government debts.
Death T"aps Open when the Credit Demand is Extremely Weak Even if the Central Banks do keep the discount rates adjusted to the market rate, the large death traps will open whenever cr~dit demand declines to such an extent that even at extremely low interest rates part of the credit supply is no longer absorbed by demand.
But this explanation cannot be satisfactory, at least not when saving is understood in the usual sense of the word as the expression of the wish to provide for the future by curtailing present consumption.
It suffices here to emphasize that the existence of cyclical depressions does not invalidate our basic proposition that changes in the propensity to save do not lead to inflation or deflation, to the appearance and disappearance of money in and out of circulation.
The argument runs roughly along these lines: while the communities become richer, both the amount of annual saving and the saturation of the economy with capital are bound to reach a point where there is no further investment opportunity for additional savings.
In all these cases the creation of bank money for the purpose of granting credits obviously involves inflation just as does the issue of money by the Central Banks; inversely, the destruction of bank money through repayment of credits involves deflation just as does the retirement of banknotes by the Central Banks.
They advocate, therefore, a hundred per cent coverage of demand deposits with the banks by deposits of the bank with Central Banks, in order to strengthen the control of the Central Banks over the money circulation.
Only the so-called sequence or chain analysis, which clearly distinguishes what happens in the past, in the present and in later acts of the drama of inflation, can correctly describe and explain the causal connections.
What is decisive for the effects on the capital structure is not the nature of the supply, but the nature of the demand for credits.
When the banks grant credits having no counterpart in simultaneous saving, they simply create new savings, as surely as the new debtors in the balance sheets of banks must be matched by new creditors, and the new bills in the balance sheet of Central Banks by new banknote liabilities.
Money in the wider sense will disappear from circulation, but at the same time the quasi-capital of the banks and of the Central Banks, which was created by the earlier granting of credits, will be destroyed.
This is a Gorrect description of the effects of money and credit inflation of the current period (Period II) on the prices of goods produced in the past production period (Period I), in which inflation could not yet influence the volume of output.
The Demand for Products of the Current Production Period The effect of inflation on the prices of goods produced in the current production period (Period II) is much more complicated, because now not only the demand for, but also the supply of goods increases.
is obviously dependent on the amounts entrepreneurs will be prepared to spend on production in the next, the future, production period (Period III)-just as the demand for the goods produced in the past period (Period I) was dependent on the amounts entrepreneurs were prepared to spend in the current production period (Period II).
The Supply of Products of the Current Period However, the supply of goods produced in the current Period (II), too, is higher than it was at the end of Period I.
The Price Level for Products of the Current Period The price level for products of the current Period (II) is determined by the demand emanating from the purchasing power created in Period III, and by the supply of goods produced in the current Period (II).
Both have increased: the future demand through the second injection of inflationary money, and the supply-with a time lag-because depending on the elasticity of the labor supply entrepreneurs produce more in the current Period (II) than they did in Period I.
The immediate adjustment of the economy to inflation is also often prevent~d by the fact that the amount of fixed capital cannot be increased as quickly as the .amount of variable capital.
In the transition period the amount of variable capital, especially the capital used for payment of wages and thus leading to increased employment, will only be increased to the extent to which the production advantages due to inflation outweigh the disadvantages caused by the unfavorable combination of fixed and variable capital.
But, as already mentioned, what mitigates the inflationary effects in this case is not the prevailing unemployment as such; itis the fact that in such a situation additional labor is generally, though not necessarily, available at the old wage level, i.e. that the supply curve of labor runs horizontally at this wage level for a certain time.
Most of the so-called growth theories, so popular nowadays, try to demonstrate-with the help of innumerable and mostly entirely speculative models-that a population growth, if not accompanied by a proportionate increase in the capital supply, is bound to lead to all sorts of difficulties in the economic development, both short and long run.
In this case-which corresponds somewhat to the case of changing payment habits-an increase of the quantity of money by inflationary credit expansion has no influence on the general price level since the quantity of money appearing on the markets for goods in a certain period is not increased.
They are concerned with the lack-or sometimes abundance -of capital necessary to absorb the new ~abor force into the productive process, the problem of need' for capital as distinct from the problem of need for money from which it has to bebut seldom is-clearly distinguished.
Without penetrating too far into the thicket of the growth theories the following might be remarked: Growth theories, mostly concerned with the consequences of a lack of capital offered, are the exact counterpart of the stagnation theories, concerned with the consequences of an excess of capital offered.
The former theories are nowadays, during the boom, as eagerly discussed as the latter were in the 1930s, after the great depression-a new proof of how quickly fashions in economics change and how economists are prone to overestimate the importance, in the long run, of a momentary situation.
The assumption of inflexibility of wages diverts attention from the fact that the supply of labor is, via the price mechanism, adjustable to every capital supply situation, at least for the longer run.
As soon as one concedes that the rigidity of wages is not godsent, one recognizes that inflationary credit expansion is not the necessary and indisputable remedy for- discrepancies between labor and capital supply, but that one is dealing with a genuine dilemma: the pros and cons of an entirely inelastic money supply-and therefore the absence of any inflationary credit expansion---have to be set against the pros and cons of filling the alleged capital gap by inflationary credit expansion.
75"""'77) that, given a certain capital, the effects of an increased labor supply are: increased production as a result .of increased employment, declining wages and increasing interest rates as a result of the distribu.. tion of the given .capital to equip an increased number of workers, and the consequent increased marginal productivity of capital.
The difficulties of overcoming in this way the discrepancies between growth of population and a fixed capital supply arise of course, in practice, from the rigidity of wages on the downside that is enforced by unions and is now already traditional.
This argumentation is the result partly of confusing the problem of capital need with the problem of money need, and partly of thinking along the lines of a very rough form of quantity theory.
This can, of course, be achieved by preventing the rise of the interest rates in spite of the increased demand for capital, i.e. by supplying the needed capital at the old rates by inflationary credit expansion.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION Cumulative Effect of the Original Inflation The second money inflation (in Period III) is caused, as we have seen, by the fact that the first inflation (in the current Period II) lifted the prices of goods produced in the past (Period I).
The lower prices induce the entrepreneurs to curtail their credit demands, with the result that the prices for the products of the current period drop still lower.
In so far as waiting and hurrying alter the velocity of money turnover, they also account for a further well-known phenomenon observed during all great inflations: at first the price level increases more slowly than the quantity of money issued by the Central Banks-the official money inflation; in the later phases the price level increases more quickly.
Whereas, at the beginning of inflation, many buyers wait because they do not as yet believe in the permanency of the price rise, many sellers now wait because they are as yet not THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION convinced that the lower prices are there to stay, or because they want to avoid deflation losses at all cost.
The latter are to some extent replaced by carry-over creditsthe difference being that now goods no longer pass into the hands of those who in the normal course of events would have bought them for further processing, or as distributors and consumers, but remain in the hands of entrepreneurs at earlier production and trading stages.
In the later stages of deflation, the waiting of buyers expecting a price fall may accentuate the easing of the credit situation brought about by the liquidation of carry-over credits.
However, in times of inflation this happens-not because of the Keynesian psychological law, according to which an increase in the living standard leads to an increase in the savings rate, but because inflation leads to a redistribution of income in favor of higher, and at the expense of lower income groups.
Since the rich generally save more than the poor, the result of the redistribution of income must be an increase in the savings rate-at least as long as the public's inflation-consciousness does not destroy its propensity to save.
But the combined increase of incomes of later, future periods cannot be regarded as the multiplication result of the increased income of one period, just as the combined income of several periods together cannot be regarded as the multiplication result of the income of one period.
According to the older theories the amounts spent on investments and consumption in any future production period are dependent on all the data of the future, as well as on the psychological reactions of people to these data.
Multiplier and acceleration types of analysis treat all these other data-under the heading propensity to consume or to invest-as given and constant or THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION decreasing in the same proportion, and the amounts of original spending on investment and consumption as the variables of the system.
It is nothing else but a replica of the often refuted purchasing power theory of which Professor, Hansen, before he became a Hansenian, stated: It is, therefore, .not surprising that the theory should become widespread that higher wages are the cure for the restricted market and declining price level of the last decade.
But suppose, for argument's sake, the entrepreneurs were Keynesiansand would anticipate that products of the past period-and also of the current period-would meet a demand or price 'increase resulting from the shift of income from the savers to the spenders.
All depends on what the entrepreneurs expect the effect of wage lowering to be on the demand and price situation-which again depends on whether they believe that production in further production periods, which produces the income to buy the products of the current period, will increase sufficiently so that the addition to total income will at least compensate the demand deficit resulting from the income shifts from the spenders to the savers.
THE ECONOMY IN INFLATION AND DEFLATION The End of Inflation Inflation stops when the Central Banks raise their discount rate to a level at which the inflation profits expected by entrepreneurs appear compensated by the higher cost of credit.
Unless the loan contracts provide for changes in the value of money during the lending period-and this is hardly ever the case-inflation creates real profits for the debtors and real losses for the creditors.
As a general rule, shares will protect the better against inflation the more the flexibility of prices of the products exceeds the flexibility of the compensation of the production factors.
This not only dampens inflation, as described above, but creates also the phenomenon that at the beginning of inflationary war financing only a small part of government bonds remains in the hands of the banks while the greater part is taken up by the public.
In THE BUSINESS CYCLE 16~ other words: delay in adjustment of the bank rate to the increased credit demand opens the death trap for money with the result that the volume of money grows; the subsequent belated adjustment forces the money back into the death trap so that the volume of money shrinks.
Each of these parts, in turn, is divided in two sections: during the latter section of the upswing and the first section of the downswing production exceeds, and during the latter section of the downswing and the first section of the upswing, production falls short of the intracyclical average.
Error about the Reversibility of Price Movements a Necessary Condition for the Cycle Even those who do not consider the fluctuations of the cycle .as caused mass psychologically must admit thatacertain mental attitude of the people, and especially of entrepreneurs, is a necessary condition for their happening.
Their behavior is simply the result of their being bearish at that particular moment, i.e. expecting prices -possibly also of bonds-to decline, and their liquidity preference will be the greater, the greater they judge the probability and extent of the price fall.
The disinclination to own goods and the preference to own cash are taken as two separate phenomena, whereas they are really two sides of the same phenomenon: people prefer not to own goods because they fear the exchange rate of goods and money will move to the advantage of the latter.
Only the combination of a simultaneous decline in the propensity to consume and to invest, such as occurs in cyclical depressions as a result of general pessimism on prices and demand, can lead to such abundance of credit supply and such scarcity of credit demand that deflation ensues.
As soon as lack of confidence involves many or all the banks of the country the government is likely to step in and provide the banks with all the banknotes needed.
Because of this so-called change in the velocity of circulation, prices and production may increase in the first case and decrease in the second even when the amount of money issued by the money-creating institutions-the official inflation, as we have called it-does not increase or decrease correspondingly.
The reason for this phenomenon is that, on the one hand, a great waste of agricultural products takes place during wars, and, on the other hand, production of raw materials is much less elastic than industrial production, so that the prices of the former are much more sensitive to changes in the demand.
People look, so to speak, through the mountain of the bull market into the next bear market 4 For a detailed study of the post-war monetary policy in the United States until the end of 1952, see Appendix I, pp.
The bull market which started in mid-1949 and lasted to the end of 1952 never gave rise to prices out of proportion with yield in spite of a lax credit and monetary policy, the reason being that many stock exchange operators had been expecting a new depression ever since the beginning .of 1951.
There are various reasons for the popularity of the latter policy-among them the naive belief that easy money guarantees full employment, the equally naive belief that the burden of the public debt could with in).punity be alleviated by artificially low interest rates, and last but not least resentment against unearned income in general.
Securities during the Cycle Quite .generally speaking, common share prices depend on the one hand upon the dividends paid or expected, and on the other upon the prevailing yield of long-term bonds, i.e., the interest rates of the capital market.
We have already mentioned the reasons for this lag: the relative stickiness of the discount rates of Central Banks and the existence of private hoards, out of which and into which money flows at first.
The study of the stock market more than that of any other market can help the theoretician to understand the interrelation between the world of facts and the world of expectations-so much discussed just now.
Shares as a Source of Long-Term Income Most of those contemplating the purchase of common shares look to the regular and permanent income from dividend 1 Part V is a translation of a lecture delivered at the Schweizerisches Institut fur Auslandsforschung in Zurich and published in Schweizerische Zeitschrift fur Volkswirtschaft und Statistik, vol.
Only the rise in yields in the bear market of 1929-32 and the fall in yields in the bull market of 1932-37 correspond to similar developments of bond yields, and may therefore have been influenced-at least partly-by the latter.
This is so altqough only dividends create income for the shareholder, and the undistributed part of earnings is important to him only in so far at it improves the quality of the dividends and the ability to produce future dividends.
If, for instance, net earnings of a share are expected to be $10.00, and if the average price-earning ratio of the share has so far been 12 : 1, then the future average price of the share is believed to be $120.
Expectations as the Cause of Market Distortions The fluctuations of share prices are essentially due to two causes: the fluctuations in dividends and net earnings, and the fluctuations in the rate of interest at which the fluctuating dividends are capitalized.
The case is comparable not to that of the bank in Monte Carlo, which can and does rely on red and black turning up equally often in the .long run, PRICE FORMATION ON STOCK MARKETS but rather to that of the individual player, who cannot know whether the ball will stop on red or on black.
In a widely known passage of his General Theory, Keynes has drawn from the undoubted dependence of stock market prices upon subjective factors, moods and errors the conclusion that the flow of savings into investments is no longer dictated COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS by long-run expectations of yield, but rather by short-run expectations of stock market gains, particularly in the United States.
But the cost of such reduction would be a contraction of investment to the small volume of early capitalism and an obstruction of economic progress, which is decisively dependent upon the free flow of venture capital from the saver to the entrepreneur.
/ If the expectations of all parties to the markets changed simultaneously and to the same extent, prices would rise in the COMMON SENSE ECONOMICS boom and decline in the depression without any turnover.
The successful will buy near the trough of the price curve and sell near its peak; during most of the bull market they will hold shares, and during most of the bear market they will hold cash.
The unsuccessful, on the other hand, will sell somewhere near the lowest price and buy somewhere near the highest; they will hold cash during most of the bull market, and shares during most of the bear market.
In between there must be, and indeed are, innumerable mixed groups-for instance the half successful who hold shares during only half the bull market and cash during the other half, because they either bought too late or sold too early or both; and their counterpart, the half unsuccessful, who hold shares during half the bear market and cash during the other half, because they either sold their shares too late or re-purchased them too early or both.
The successful groups are distinguished first by being better informed, second by having the ability to resist the forces of mass opinion so that they manage to buy when the majority is deeply pessimistic and to sell when the majority indulges in exuberant optimism.
Therefore, when prices are low, stocks and shares must move out of the hands of the many into the hands of the few, and when prices are high, they must move out of the hands of the few into the hands of the many.
At the end of a bear market and the beginning of a bull market the number of share owners is usually small and the average holdings of each owner large.
One speaks of accumulation in the case of the shares being bought by few, and of distribution in the case of the shares being bought by many.
An almost superhuman effort is needed to evade the influence of mass opinion-particularly in the United States, where price movements and thus the opinions of others are continuously reported to the farthest corners of the country by the ticker.
They have to go against mass opinion and buy toward the end of the exaggeration phase of the bear market and at the beginning of the adaptation phase of the bull market.
The following articles are reproduced here as Appendices I and II because they give a picture of the events in the field of monetary and credit policy in the United States from 1949 to the middle of 1954, and of the comments they called for.
The prevailing approach shocks old-fashioned economists furthermore by the fatalism with which the let-down of the economy after the exhaustion of the momentary stimuli is considered as unavoidable.
In other words, the banks, with the assistance of the Federal Reserve System, have through the granting of inflationary credits created in the present an excess of effective demand which will be lacking at a PROSPERITY BY INFLATION later date.
\ If neo-classical economists do not share the fatalism concerning the inevitability of the slump, they share sti111ess the optimism of the Keynesian planners concerning the ability of governments to prolong a boom indefinitely by artificial devices such as deficit spending.
They rather believe that such spending, if begun before the maladjustments of the preceding boom have been liquidated, can only lead to needless .exhaustion of valuable ammunition to be used against the so-called secondary deflation, and ultimately to the ruin of the credit of the State.
I believe that if we let the boom run, we are just repeating the mistakes of the war (which cost the dollar 50 per cent of its purchasing pqwer), and of the period following the outbreak of the Korean war.
In order to support our view, we shall first examine the features and the strength of the present inflation as it has developed since the autumn of 1949, the period usually referred to as the second post-war boom-the first post-war boom extending from the beginning of 1946 until the end of 1948.
Whatever the shortcomings of an index based upon the so-called physical volume may be, one cannot fail to be very impressed by this increase of almost 33 per cent, especially if one considers that the new top surpasses the top of the first post-war boom at the end of 1948 by roughly 40 points.
Since 1949 the holding of government securities no longer decreased, so that the net effect of the loan increase of $20 billion, plus the increase of some other assets, is an increage in tDtal IDa.ns and investments of commercial banks from roughly $114 to roughly $145 billion, an increase of $31 billion.
Our contention that the quantity of bank money has increased almost 25 per cent is, incidentally, confirmed by the movements of the counterpart of demand deposits, the reserve balances of member banks with the Federal Reserve Banks.
As far as this is the case, the higher monetary demand must have spent itself not on higher prices but on the larger product which indeed came to the markets as a result of the tremendous increase in productivity mentioned above.
Greater Production and Higher Elnployment During Inflation If this is correct-and the experiences of the twenties seem to prove the accuracy of the statement-then also the popular argument, that a higher bank money and currency circulation is justified and made innoxious by higher production, must be considered an error.
The fact that the depression expected by many for 1951, and then for 1952, has not materialized until now has not only induced the forecasters to postpone the day of reckoning further into the future, but after the future has PROSPERITY BY INFLATION approached it has also induced some of the official and semiofficial forecasters to postpone the moment of the depression to Calendas Graecas.
By making the supply of credit more expensive, the exaggeration of the prosperity phase of the cycle, and thus the following depression, could and should be prevented.
It considers this-provided that the preceding boom has been braked by raising the interest rate-as necessary and sufficient to increase, by stimulating the use of credit, the aggregate demand of the economy and restore full employment.
This is indeed the position which before THE ECONOMIC SITUATION IN THE U.S.A. 1953 was taken by New Dealistic economists like Hansen, Harris, and, above all, by the leaders of trade unions who denounced every possible increase in the cost of credit as a wicked interference in the full employment policy and an unwarranted gift of advantages to the capitalist class.
For, contrary to the cas~ in which the cycle was braked at an average level, in the case of the stabilization of the cycle at the highest level there is no more potential credit 'demand which has been left unsatisfied, because the interest rate was too high, and which can be satisfied after it has been lowered.
If the State compensates the failing demand of the private sector of the economy, immediately, and not only after liquidation of the boom, it not only has to spend extraordinarily high amounts but the spending has also to be repeated permanently.
Republican Credit Policy I One of the chief objections of the Republicans to the Democratic economic policy was concerned with the permanent easy money policy of the New Dealers, which, it was argued, robbed the dollar THE ECONOMIC SITUATION'IN THE U.S.A. of 50 per cent of its purchasing power since 1939.
Contrary to the opinion of most of the New Dealistic economists, according to whom raising of the interest rate has no effect in preventing inflation-an argument by which they had resisted every raising of the interest rate-the effect was strong and spontaneous.
Conservative economists, wishing THE ECONOMIC SITUATION IN THE U.S.A. to prevent the resumption of inflation by all means, believed the only possible way of reducing unemployment was through an adjustment of costs to the price and demand level which now showed no signs of further inflation.
they demanded-in an utopian fashion perhaps-the reduction of wages to the level prevailing at the beginning of 1953, or at least their stabilization at the level of the moment, so that an increase of productivity would be able to absorb the wage rises which had taken place until then.
They demanded, therefore, the adjustment of the price and money level to the cost level, instead of conversely the adjustment of the latter to the former.
The population is through the Keynesian economists educated in the belief that unemployment is always the result of a failing demand for labor and never the result of a too expensive supply, so that not the wages but the monetary policy must be responsible.
(1) The end of the inflationary boom in the middle of 1953 did not coincide by chance with the height of the interest rate but was a My forecast regarding the attempt to rekindle the inflationary boom in the meantime, proved to be correct.
Therefore, the so-called businesscycle consciousness has, by its dampening effect on the credit demand, compensated-at least partly-for the mistakes of the governmental credit supply policy; with the result that heavy exaggeration of the boom, and, thus, the danger of a deep depression no longer correctible through interest rate lowering, have.
