South Asia. The Indian subcontinent.
India.
Like many geographical terms, these are imprecise.
South Asia logically refers to Malaysia, the southernmost country of mainland Asia.
By convention, however, Malaysia is placed in Southeast Asia, and “South Asia” is applied to an area that lies considerably to the west.
In its widest sense, it embraces India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, and Maldives, which form the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation.
The “Indian subcontinent,” so called to suggest that—although a part of the Asian continent—it is in many ways self-contained, may cover the same seven countries, or exclude the two island states, Sri Lanka and Maldives.
“India” is the name of the Republic of India, the subcontinent’s largest country; historically, it also covers Pakistan and Bangladesh, which before 1947 were parts of India.
This book is a history of the Republic of India, including Pakistan and Bangladesh until they became separate states.
When referring to events that occurred before the middle of the twentieth century, it applies the designations South Asia, Indian subcontinent, and India interchangeably to the area now occupied by all three countries.
Geologists say that the subcontinent was once an island, and that it has been driven into the rest of Asia by plate tectonics.
As a result, it is shaped rather like a diamond, bounded on two sides by arms of the Indian Ocean (the Arabian Sea on the west, and the Bay of Bengal on the east), and on the other two by mountain ranges that were thrown up by the collision with Asia.
The diamond measures roughly 2,000 miles from both north to south and east to west.
The Republic of India has an area of 1,222,243 square miles, which makes it the seventh-largest country in world.
It is in the same league as Argentina or Kazakhstan, and considerably under half the size of Brazil or Australia.
Pakistan and Bangladesh add another 364,351 square miles.
Even then, however, the subcontinent would easily fit twice over into the United States.
Nevertheless, this area is large enough to allow for great diversity in terrain.
South Asia is separated from its neighbors to the north by the Himalayas and their offshoots the Karakoram and the Hindu Kush, which include some of the highest mountains in the world.
Lower but still impressive ranges of mountains mark much of the boundary with Afghanistan and Iran in the west; in the east, India extends toward the hills of Burma.
Inside of these highlands come the basins of two great rivers, the Indus and the Ganges, huge flat expanses of land separated from each other by the Thar or Great Indian Desert and a range of low hills.
This crescent-shaped region is often called the Indo-Gangetic plain.
Many of the great rivers of north India deposit silt in mountain valleys, on the plains, and at their mouths.
As a result, much of the Indo-Gangetic plain is quite fertile.
The Indus rises in Tibet.
It flows through India and Pakistan, where it is joined by many tributaries that give Punjab (“five waters”) its name, and empties into the Arabian Sea.
(Since 1947, Punjab has been divided between India and Pakistan.)  The Ganges and its tributary the Yamuna originate in Himalayan glaciers and, after running through north India, flow into the Bay of Bengal through a huge delta, two thirds of which now lies in Bangladesh.
South of the Gangetic plain the land rises slowly into the Vindhya mountains, the traditional boundary between northern and southern India.
Then comes peninsular India or the Deccan, most of which is a dry, hilly plateau.
To the west, the plateau ends in a range of mountains called the Western Ghats, below which a narrow strip of land runs along the Arabian Sea.
The rather lower Eastern Ghats separate the plateau from the coastal plain on the Bay of Bengal.
The Narmada, immediately south of the Vindhyas, is the main west-flowing river of the Deccan.
Most of the peninsula’s other rivers (which include the Godavari and the Krishna) begin in the Western Ghats and run eastward into the Bay of Bengal.
The Deccan rivers are fed by rain.
This means that they become torrents if the rains are heavy and virtually dry up if the rains fail.
They leave little silt in inland valleys, although several of them break into large fertile deltas in the coastal plains.
Finally, most of the Tamil country, the southern tip of India, is a dry plain.
India includes tropical rain forests and deserts, rocky hills and savannas, dry forests and farmland; in 1994, 23 percent of its land area was forested, just under 4 percent was meadowland or pasture, and 57 percent was used for agriculture.
There is great regional variation in climate.
The Tamil country is hot for twelve months of the year, the Deccan plateau similar but with somewhat lower temperatures.
The IndoGangetic plain has the hottest weather in all India in June, and warm days with cool nights in January.
The mountainous areas of the north see harsh, snowy winters, and pleasant summers.
Nevertheless, most of the subcontinent shares a climate of three seasons.
During the hot weather, which typically runs from March to June, the temperature rises steadily, reaching 110⬚F in the northern plains.
This makes it difficult to work during the day, and people try to confine their activities to night and early morning.
Then comes the southwest monsoon, moisture-bearing winds that blow off the Indian Ocean in two branches; one heads eastward from the Arabian Sea, the other northward from the Bay of Bengal, until they merge over the Gangetic Plain.
The monsoon reaches south India in June, Gujarat on the west coast in early or mid-July, and Punjab in the north a week or two later.
Its winds bring rainstorms that may last a few minutes or several hours each day.
The rain reduces temperatures and waters the fields.
It also ruins roads and may cause flooding; though if it fails, India faces disaster.
The final season of the year is the cold weather, from November to March, when cool dry air from central Asia blows across the subcontinent.
Terrain and climate make India home to a great range of wildlife.
The national bird is the peacock.
Even in big cities, the visitor will see monkeys, vultures, and parrots, and the country is known around the world for elephants and snakes (including the King cobra, which can be up to twelve feet long).
Over half of the world’s 5,000 to 7,000 tigers live in India.
Their number is steadily declining, thanks to poaching and the destruction of their habitat; and Project Tiger, a program established to rebuild India’s tiger population, seems to be enjoying considerably less success than it did during the 1970s and 1980s.
(This is only one symptom of the effects on wildlife of the spread of human settlement over the last century, despite the efforts of a long-established conservation movement.)  Other fauna include cats and dogs, foxes and jackals, rhinocer-oses, mongooses, deer, birds ranging from flamingos to pheasants, and freshwater and sea fish.
Among domesticated animals are humpbacked oxen, water buffaloes, horses, and camels, as well as sheep, goats, and pigs.
Indians pride themselves on the fact that their country is the “world’s largest democracy.
” Almost alone in the developing world, India has been a democracy since its independence from colonial rule.
The only break occurred between 1975 and 1977, when prime minister Indira Gandhi established a temporary dictatorship after declaring a state of emergency.
It is unlikely that any future leader will repeat Mrs. Gandhi’s experiment: Over the last twenty-five years, democratic practices have become so firmly entrenched in India that no dictatorial regime could find the public support it would need to survive.
A military coup is also highly unlikely, which sets India apart from most of its neighbors (Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Burma have all been under military rule).
Control over the Indian armed forces has always remained in civilian hands.
Despite the use of troops in political situations—for example, against antigovernment demonstrations—the armed forces have not been politicized, in the sense that they do not take sides in politics.
Like the United States, India has a federal political system.
The central government is led by the prime minister, whose equivalent in each of the country’s twenty-eight states is a chief minister.
Elections to the lower house of the federal parliament and the state legislatures are held regularly.
They are generally free and fair, although often accompanied by violence.
Though voter turnout in India is lower than in most developed countries, it is higher than in the United States.
Parliament and state legislatures meet regularly, and use their power to decide who will or will not be prime minister or chief minister.
Political leaders who lose elections or legislative majorities peacefully hand over power to successors from opposition parties.
The judiciary is often called a pillar of democracy, and the Supreme Court of India has generally remained free of political interference.
The same is true of some (though not all) of the state supreme courts, which are called high courts.
Admittedly, the effectiveness of the judicial system is reduced by the fact that India has far too few judges.
This has produced a backlog of 27 million cases, including over 20,000 pending before the Supreme Court.
A further sign of Indian democracy is the existence of numerous political parties to serve different ideological, social, or regional constitu-encies.
Indians, unlike Americans, face no real difficulties if they want to start viable new parties.
Nevertheless, it looks as if (for the time being) federal politics in India have settled down to a two-party system, based on the Bharatiya Janata Party or BJP, and the Indian National Congress (Indira) or Congress (I).
With smaller affiliated parties, the BJP and Congress (I) both have support across much of the country, and they may alternate in power for some time to come.
The current leader of the BJP is the prime minister of India, Atal Bihari Vajpayee; Congress (I) is headed by Sonia Gandhi, the Italian-born widow of the former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi.
With just over 1 billion people, India is the second-most populous country on earth.
(If Pakistan and Bangladesh were still part of India, it would supersede China in first place.)  The population is young: in 1995, 62 percent of Indians were under age 30.
Another 15 to 20 million Indian expatriates and people of Indian ancestry live in other countries—businessmen and workers in the Arab states of the Middle East; the descendants of Indian plantation laborers in the former British colonies of Fiji, Mauritius, Trinidad and Tobago, and Guyana; and emigrants who since the nineteenth century have settled in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, and Australia.
Between 1990 and 2000, Indians formed the fastest-growing community in the United States, where their numbers more than doubled (reaching 1,678,765).
Many of the new arrivals are employed in the computer field.
To many Westerners, India is first and foremost a land of religion.
Whether Indians really are more religious than other people is open to debate, but their country is the home of several major faiths.
Hinduism and Islam together account for 93 percent of the population, and India’s other religions include Christianity, Sikhism, Buddhism, and Jainism.
There are also small (and declining) numbers of Jews and Zoroastrians.
Over thousands of years, the mixture of different peoples, indigenous and foreign, has created what can only be described as an Indian ethnicity.
But even though many Indians share such biological traits as blood group, they vary greatly in physical appearance.
In the northwest, people are often relatively fair in color; northeasterners and the inhabitants of the Himalayan regions may resemble the Burmese and the Tibetans; many south Indians are quite dark.
Since the nineteenth century, this has led some Indians and foreigners to conclude that north Indians have some European blood, whereas southerners are either the aborigi-nal inhabitants of the country or immigrants from Africa.
There is, however, no real evidence to support such views.
Most of the principal languages of India belong to two families, the Indo-European and the Dravidian; only one language from outside these groups has official status in the country (this is Manipuri, which is spoken in eastern India and belongs to the Sino-Tibetan family).
English, Italian, Russian, and Persian are also Indo-European tongues, although there is not necessarily any blood relationship among their speakers.
The Dravidian languages are unique to the Indian subcontinent.
Most of them are found in the south, but the existence of scattered pockets in central India and western Pakistan suggests that they were once spoken over a much larger area than at present.