I left out the fresh fruits and vegetables (organic, semi-organic, and regular old fertilized and pesticized), the fresh meats, fish, and poultry (free-range organic chicken or penned-up chicken, skin on or off, whole or in pieces, seasoned or unseasoned, stuffed or empty), the frozen foods, the paper goods, the cleaning products, and on and on and on.
Comparison shopping to get the best price adds still another dimension to the array of choices, so that if you were a truly careful shopper, you could spend the better part of a day just to select a box of crackers, as you worried about price, flavor, freshness, fat, sodium, and calories.
Opening just one of them, a summer catalog for women, we find  19 different styles of womens T-shirts, each available in 8 different colors,  10 different styles of shorts, each available in 8 colors,  8 different styles of chinos, available in 6 to 8 colors,  7 different styles of jeans, each available in 5 colors,  dozens of different styles of blouses and pants, each available in multiple colors,  9 different styles of thongs, each available in 5 or 6 colors.
Often the capstone of a college education was a course taught by the college president, a course that integrated the various fields of knowledge to which the students had been exposed.
They go to a class, stay ten minutes to see what the professor is like, then walk out, often in the middle of the professors sentence, to try another class.
We can program those devices to find exactly the kinds of shows we want and to cut out the commercials, the promos, the lead-ins, and whatever else we find annoying.
The large array of jams attracted more people to 20 | The Paradox of Choice the table than the small array, though in both cases people tasted about the same number of jams on average.
Thirty percent of the people exposed to the small array of jams actually bought a jar; only 3 percent of those exposed to the large array of jams did so.
In a second study, this time in the laboratory, college students were asked to evaluate a variety of gourmet chocolates, in the guise of a marketing survey.
Also, a large array of options may diminish the attractiveness of what people actually choose, the reason being that thinking about the attractions of some of the unchosen options detracts from the pleasure derived from the chosen one.
Much of human progress has involved reducing the time and energy, as well as the number of processes we have to engage in and think about, for each of us to obtain the necessities of life.
In the presidential election of 2000, one of the points of contention between George W. Bush and Al Gore concerned the matter of choice in health insurance.
And not only is the health insurance issue incredibly complicated (I think Ive met only one person in my entire life who fully understands what his insurance covers and what it doesnt New Choices | 27 and what those statements that come from the insurance company really mean), but the stakes are astronomical.
A study of people actually making decisions about where to put their retirement contributions found that when people are confronted with a large number of options, they typically adopt a strategy of dividing their contributions equally among the options 5050 if there are two; 25252525, if there are four; and so on.
A typical employee, putting a sixth of her retirement in each fund, might have no idea that she has made an extremely high-risk decision, with 83 percent of her money tied to the perturbations of the stock market.
She described what had transpired to the office manager, who proceeded to tell her that this doctors philosophy was to have her examina- 30 | The Paradox of Choice tions guided by the desires of the patient.
The office manager apologized that the doctors approach had not been made clear to my wife, and suggested a follow-up conversation between my wife and the doctor about what checkups would be like in the future.
The tenor of medical practice has shifted from one in which the all-knowing, paternalistic doctor tells the patient what must be doneor just does itto one in which the doctor arrays the possibilities before the patient, along with the likely plusses and minuses of each, and the patient makes a choice.
This was a decision that he wanted the doctorspeople he had never met beforeto make for him: 32 | The Paradox of Choice The uncertainties were savage, and I could not bear the possibility of making the wrong call.
And what makes it overwhelming is not only that the decision is ours, but that the number of sources of information from which we are to make the decisions has exploded.
The latest indication of the shift in responsibility for medical decisions from doctor to patient is the widespread advertising of prescription drugs that exploded onto the scene after various federal restrictions on such ads were lifted in 1997.
The practice of having a dressdown day or casual day, which began to emerge a decade or so ago, was intended to make life easier for employees, to enable them to save money and feel more relaxed at the office.
However, the question of timing led to another series of choices involving ticking biological clocks, the demands of finishing 38 | The Paradox of Choice PhDs, and uncertainty about future employment circumstances.
Though unorthodox romantic choices are still greeted with opprobrium or much worse in many parts of the world and in some parts of the United States, it seems clear that the general trend is toward ever greater tolerance of romantic diversity.
Even when people join communities of faith and expect to participate in the life of those communities and embrace (at least some of) the practices of those communities, they simultaneously expect the communities to be responsive to their needs, their tastes, and their desires.
They can pick and choose from among the practices and teachings those that seem to suit them best, including, paradoxically, the choice of conservative denominations that are attractive in part because they limit the choices people face in other parts of their lives.
As multiracial marriages become more common, the offspring of those marriages display a variety of hues and physical features that make racial 42 | The Paradox of Choice identification from the outside more difficult.
The young New York immigrant woman from Mexico sitting in a college class in contemporary literature can ask herself, as class discussion of a novel begins, whether shes going to express her identity as the Latina, the Mexican, the woman, the immigrant, or the teenager as class discussion unfolds.
But as with marriage, choice of identity has been moving from a state in which the default option was extremely powerful and the fact of choice had little psychological reality to a state in which choice is very real and salient.
As with all the issues Ive been discussing in this chapter, this change in the status of personal identity is both good and bad news: good news because it liberates us, and bad news because it burdens us with the responsibility of choice.
In the pages that follow, we will begin to look at some of the ways we can ease that burden and, thereby, lessen the stress and dissatisfaction that comes with it.
As the number of options increases, the effort required to make a good decision escalates as well, which is one of the reasons that choice can be transformed from a blessing into a burden.
The way that the meal or the music or the movie makes you feel in the momenteither good or badcould be called experienced utility.
This peak-end rule of Kahnemans is what we use to summarize the experience, and then we rely on that summary later to remind ourselves of how the experience felt.
The summaries in turn influence our decisions about whether to have that experience again, and factors such as the proportion of pleasure to displeasure during the course of the experience or how long the experience lasted, have almost no influence on our memory of it.
Most people find these exams, in which a tube with a tiny camera on the end is inserted up the rectum and then moved around to allow the inspection of the gastrointestinal system, quite unpleasantso much so that patients avoid getting regular tests, much to their peril.
When the professor asked the students to pick a snack for each of the next three weeks, the students picked a variety, thinking theyd get tired of the same snack each week.
In a world of expanding, confusing, and conflicting options, we can see that this difficulty in targeting our goals accuratelystep one on the path to a wise decisionsets us up for disappointment with the choices we actually make.
If you play snippets of music for people or show them slides of paintings and vary the number of times they hear or see the music and the art, on the whole people will rate the familiar things more positively than the unfamiliar ones.
The avalanche of electronic information we now face is such that in order to solve the problem of choosing from among 200 brands of cereal or 5,000 mutual funds, we must first solve the problem of choosing from 10,000 web sites offering to make us informed consumers.
If you want to experience this problem for yourself, pick some prescription drug that is now being marketed directly to you, then do a web search to find out what you can about the drug that goes beyond what the ads tell you.
E Evaluating the Information VEN IF WE C AN ACCURATELY DETERMINE WHAT WE WANT AND THEN find good information, in a quantity we can handle, do we really know how to analyze, sift, weigh, and evaluate it to arrive at the right conclusions and make the right choices?
You would then reason roughly as follows: In general, the 58 | The Paradox of Choice more often we encounter something, the easier it is for us to recall it in the future.
The availability heuristic says that we assume that the more available some piece of information is to memory, the more frequently we must have encountered it in the past.
When college students who are deciding what courses to take next semester are presented with summaries of course evaluations from several hundred students that point in one direction, and a videotaped interview with a single student that points in the other direction, they are more influenced by the vivid interview than by the summary judgments of hundreds.
The authors of the study 60 | The Paradox of Choice looked at two newspapers, published on opposite sides of the U.S., and they counted the number of stories involving various causes of death.
People mistook the pervasiveness of newspaper stories about homicides, accidents, or firesvivid, salient, and easily available to memoryas a sign of the frequency of the events these stories profiled.
In 1998, for example, the group picked eleven out of twelve winners, while the average individual in Deciding and Choosing | 61 the group picked only five out of twelve, and even the best individual picked only nine.
National news sources such as CNN or USA Today tell everyone in the country, and now even the world, the same story, which makes it less likely that an individuals biased understanding of the evidence will be corrected by his friends and neighbors.
And the more people believe its true, the more likely they are to repeat it, and thus the more likely you are to hear it.
A more finely tuned example of the importance of the context of comparison comes from a study of supermarket shoppers done in the 1970s, shortly after unit-pricing started appearing on the shelves just beneath the various items.
CASH$1.45 per GALLON CREDIT$1.55 per GALLON The other, imposing a surcharge for credit, has a small sign, just above the pumps, that says: Cash$1.45 per Gallon Credit$1.55 per Gallon 64 | The Paradox of Choice The sign is small, and doesnt call attention to itself, because people dont like surcharges.
But the fact of the matter is that the dilemma facing the physician in each of the two cases above is actually the same.
Just as in the matter of discounts and surcharges, it is the framing of the choice that affects our perception of it, and in turn affects what we choose.
From the perspective of the bottom line, they appear the same; both involve a choice between seeing a concert and being $40 poorer or not seeing it and being $20 poorer.
But in the second case, the cost of the concert is $40; the cost of the lost ticket, plus the cost of the replacement ticket, both charged to the same account.
It could be part of a ways to spend a Friday night account, in which case it would join entries like hanging out at a bar, going to a basketball game, or staying home and dozing in front of the television.
The Paradox of Choice S U B J E C T I V E S TAT E 68 | O B J E C T I V E S TAT E If you look at the diagram above, you see objective states of affairs along the horizontal axispositive to the right of the vertical axis, and negative to the left of it.
If psychological responses to changes were perfectly faithful reflections of those changes, the curve relating the objective to the subjective would be a straight line that went right through the 0-point, or origin, of the graph.
The fact that the payoff for the risky choice is double the payoff for the sure thing exactly compensates for the fact that the chances youll get the payoff are halved.
The last and crucial element to the graph is the location of the neutral point.
The two gifts are of roughly equal value and randomly distributedhalf of the people in the room get one, while the other half get the other.
Considering the random distribution, you would think that about half the people in the group would have gotten the object they preferred and that the other half would be happy to swap.
Economists would tell us that the way to assess a situation like this is to think about the future, Deciding and Choosing | 73 not the past.
Susceptibility to error can only get worse as the 74 | The Paradox of Choice number and complexity of decisions increase, which in general describe the conditions of daily life.
Nobody has the time or cognitive resources to be completely thorough and accurate with every decision, and as more decisions are required and more options are available, the challenge of doing the decision making correctly becomes ever more difficult to meet.
We may go to the wrong school, choose the wrong courses, embark on the wrong career, all because of the way in which the options were presented to us.
When you put a lot of time and effort into choosing a restaurant or a place to go on vacation or a new item of clothing, you want that effort to be rewarded with a satisfying result.
Finally, a chooser is thoughtful enough to conclude that perhaps none of the available alternatives are satisfactory, and that if he or she wants the right alternative, he or she may have to create it.
And the first choice you must make is between the goal of choosing the absolute best and the goal of choosing something that is good enough.
You take the sweater back to its display table, hide it under a pile of other sweaters of a different size (so that no one will buy it out from under you), and leave to check out the other store.
The difference between the two types is that the satisficer is content with the merely excellent as opposed to the absolute best.
I believe that the goal of maximizing is a source of great dissatis- When Only the Best Will Do | 79 faction, that it can make people miserableespecially in a world that insists on providing an overwhelming number of choices, both trivial and not so trivial.
When Nobel Prizewinning economist and psychologist Herbert Simon initially introduced the idea of satisficing in the 1950s, he suggested that when all the costs (in time, money, and anguish) involved in getting information about all the options are factored in, satisficing is, in fact, the maximizing strategy.
The perceptiveness of Simons observation is at the heart of many of the strategies I will offer for fighting back against the tyranny of overwhelming choices.
When I am in the car listening to the radio, I often check other stations to see if something better is playing, even if I am relatively satisfied with what Im listening to.
| 81 Im a big fan of lists that attempt to rank things (the best movies, the best singers, the best athletes, the best novels, etc.).
I find that writing is very difficult, even if its just writing a letter to a friend, because its so hard to word things just right.
When I am in the car listening to the radio, I often check other stations to see if something better is playing, even if I am relatively satisfied with what Im listening to.
Yes, the maximizer likes this song, but the idea is to get to listen to the best song, not to settle for one that is good enough.
Ill just pick out the best of the current releases and then scour the rest of the store to see if theres a classic that would be even better.
Im a big fan of lists that attempt to rank things (the best movies, the best singers, the best athletes, the best novels, etc.).
I find that writing is very difficult, even if its just writing a letter to a friend, because its so hard to word things just right.
And when the questioning was broadened to include other experiences, we found something much more compelling 84 | The Paradox of Choice EXAMPLE OF A MAXIMIZER  The New Yorker Collection 2000 Leo Cullum from cartoonbank.com.
We tested this idea by having the same people who filled out the Maximization Scale fill out a variety of other questionnaires that have been shown over the years to be reliable indicators of well-being.
Then subtract from 8 the number you put next to the first question, and add the result to the other numbers.
Perfectionists may not be as happy with the results of their actions as they should be, but they seem to be happier with the results of their actions than maximizers are with the results of theirs.
The task, then, for someone who feels overwhelmed by choices, is to apply the satisficing strategy more often, letting go of the expectation that the best is attainable.
In fact, the more options there are, the more likely When Only the Best Will Do | 93 it is that the satisficer will find one that meets his or her standards.
They might be aware that they have trouble making decisions and that they fear they will regret decisions and that they often derive little lasting satisfaction from the decisions they have made, but all with no conscious awareness of what is at the root of the problem.
Throughout this chapter, I have been talking about maximizing and the number of options people face as if the two were indepen- 96 | The Paradox of Choice dent of each other.
The food we eat, the cars we drive, the houses we live in, the music we listen to, the books we read, the hobbies we pursue, the charities we contribute to, the demonstrations we attendeach of these choices has an expressive function, regardless of its practical importance.
One vote is so unlikely to make a dif- Choice and Happiness | 101 ference that its hardly worth the inconvenience of walking across the street to the polling place.
In the 1960s, psychologist Martin Seligman and his collaborators performed an experiment that involved teaching three different groups of animals to jump over a little hurdle from one side of a box to the other to escape or avoid an electric shock.
Seligman and his coworkers expected, and found, that this second group would learn a bit more quickly than the first, reasoning that some of what they had learned in the first experiment might transfer to the second.
Quite apart from the instrumental benefits of choicethat it enables people to get what they wantand the expressive benefits of choicethat it enables people to say who they arechoice enables people to be actively and effectively engaged in the world, with profound psychological benefits.
104 | The Paradox of Choice The first is that, as the experience of choice and control gets broader and deeper, expectations about choice and control may rise to match that experience.
Like the mechanical rabbit at the dog-racing track that speeds along just ahead of the dogs no matter how fast they run, aspirations and expectations about control speed ahead of their realization, no matter how liberating the realization becomes.
The benefit of this techniqueknown as the experience sampling methodis that rather than relying on people to be able to look back accurately on how theyve been feeling over a period of months, the computer asks them to assess how theyre feeling at that very moment.
As Myers graphically puts it, since 1960 in the U.S., the divorce rate has doubled, the teen suicide rate has tripled, the recorded violent crime rate has quadrupled, the prison population has quintupled, the percentage of babies born to unmarried parents has sextupled, and the rate of cohabitation without marriage (which actually is a pretty good predictor of eventual divorce) has increased sevenfold.
Put these two pieces of information together, and it might lead you to expect that depression is going the way of polio, with 110 | The Paradox of Choice autonomy and choice as the psychological vaccines.
Most people find it extremely challenging to balance the conflicting impulses of freedom of choice on the one hand and loyalty and commitment on the other.
With clearer rules of the game for us to live byconstraints that specify how much of life each of us should devote to ourselves and what our obligations to family, friends, and community should bemuch of the onus for making these decisions would be lifted.
If buckling your seat belt is a rule, you will always buckle up, and the issue of whether its worth the trouble for a one-mile trip to the market just wont arise.
Having the discipline to live by the rules you make for yourself is, of course, another matter, but one things for sure: following rules eliminates troublesome choices in your daily life, each time you get into a car or each time you go to a cocktail party.
As we saw in the last chapter, its a lot easier to decide whether something is good enough (to satisfice) than it is to decide whether something is the best (to maximize).
So by using rules, presumptions, standards, and routines to constrain ourselves and limit the decisions we face, we can make life more manageable, which gives us more time to devote ourselves to other people and to the decisions that we cant or dont want to avoid.
In other words, a squirrel in the wild doesnt have the wealth of experience and of choice that people do when they decide to take a walk in the forest.
What the squirrel does have is the security that it will notice what matters most and know how to do what it needs to do to survive, because biology supplies the needed constraints on choice.
The necessity of making trade-offs alters how we feel about the decisions we face; more important, it affects the level of satisfaction we experience from the decisions we ultimately make.
Going to a baseball game If you go for the dinner, the cost will be whatever you pay for the meal, plus the passed up opportunity to see a movie.
If we assume that opportunity costs take away from the overall desirability of the most-preferred option and that we will feel the opportunity costs associated with many of the options we reject, then the more alternatives there are from which to choose, the greater our experience of the opportunity costs will be.
The existence of multiple alternatives makes it easy for us to imagine alternatives that dont existalternatives that combine Missed Opportunities A COUPLE DISCOVERS COSTS OF THE H AV I N G | 123 OPPORTUNITY CHILDREN  The New Yorker Collection 2000 David Sipress from cartoonbank.com.
124 | The Paradox of Choice If there were some way to say, objectively, what was the best vacation or the best job or the best way to spend a Saturday night, then adding options could only make people better off.
T The Psychology of Trade-offs HE PSYCHOLOGY OF TRADE-OFFS HAS BEEN INVESTIGATED IN A series of studies in which participants are asked to make hypo- thetical decisions about which car to buy or which apartment to rent or which job to take, based on a range of features, including price.
This choice was clearly different from the way people reacted to the task in which they had to establish a price that would make the two cars equivalent.
Perhaps seeing the inferior Aiwa bolsters peoples confidence that the Sony is really a good deal, though in a market with dozens of brands and models of CD players available, the presence of this second alternative doesnt really prove much.
So the conflict introduced by the added option made it difficult to choose one pen or the other, and the majority of participants ended up choosing neither.
It is 128 | The Paradox of Choice hard to imagine why adding the pair of cheaper pens to the mix should do anything to alter the value of the good pen in comparison with $1.50.
If 75 percent of people think the good pen is a better deal than $1.50 in the first case, then 75 percent ought to think so in the second case as well.
The facts of the case are complicated by ambiguous economic, social, and emotional considerations, and you decide to base your decision entirely on the following few observations: Parent A Parent B Average income Average health Average working hours Reasonable rapport with child Relatively stable social life Above-average income Minor health problems Lots of work-related travel Very close relationship with the child Extremely active social life To which parent would you award sole custody of the child?
With the judgment framed in this negative language, the percentage of those voting for the child to go to B dropped from 64 percent to 55 percent.
Respondents cling to the form of the question 130 | The Paradox of Choice (award or deny) as a guide to the kinds of reasons they will be looking for.
Instead of examining all aspects of a decision, we home in on only 132 | The Paradox of Choice one or two, perhaps ignoring aspects of the decision that are very important.
Opportunity Costs, Trade-offs, and Exploding Options W EVE SEEN THAT AS THE NUMBER OF OPTIONS UNDER CONSIDERA - tion goes up and the attractive features associated with the rejected alternatives accumulate, the satisfaction derived from the chosen alternative will go down.
The trick is to limit the set of possibilities so that the opportunity costs dont add up to make all the alternatives unattractive.
Appreciating the cumulative burden posed by opportunity costs can help us better understand the findings of the study mentioned in Chapter 1 in which two sets of participants encountered a variety of different flavors of a brand of high-quality jam at a sample table set up in a gourmet food store.
In a third study, students evaluated either six or thirty gourmet chocolates on their visual appeal, then picked one to taste and evaluate, and were then offered a small box of the chocolates in lieu of payment for participating in the study.
Students who were exposed to thirty chocolates gave lower ratings to the chocolate they tasted and were less likely to take a box of chocolates rather than money after the experiment than students who were exposed to only six.
As the chooser closes in on a decision, the various attractive features of the jams not chosen can mount up to make the preferred jam seem less exceptional.
The net result, after the subtractions, is that none of the topics will be attractive enough to overcome inertia and get the student to sit down at the word processor.
But I think theres another reason for this decline, one that I can illustrate with the following example: Until recently, I 136 | The Paradox of Choice lived in Swarthmore, Pennsylvania, the beautiful suburban community that houses the college where I teach.
In the laboratory session, half of the people were asked to fill up a page analyzing the reasons why their relationship with their dating partner was the way it was.
A more optimistic view of this last result is that the process of analyzing a relationship actually produces insight, so that we better 140 | The Paradox of Choice understand the true nature of our relationship.
When students who had been asked to analyze their relationships were compared to students not asked to do so, the researchers found that unanalyzed attitudes about the relationship were a better predictor of whether the relationship would still be intact months later than analyzed attitudes.
While students at many colleges are happy to discover a subject to study that not only do they enjoy but that will enable them to make a living, many of the students I teach have multiple interests and capabilities.
Where the people they love are located and how close to them they want to be are just more factors to be entered into the decision, to be traded off against various aspects of the jobs themselves.
It is hard to avoid the conclusion that my students might be better off with a little less talent or with a little more of a sense that they owed it to their families to settle down back home, or even a dose of Depression-era necessitytake the secure job and get on with it!
142 | The Paradox of Choice The anguish and inertia caused by having too many choices was described in the book Quarterlife Crisis: The Unique Challenges of Life in Your Twenties.
Finally making the choice somehow minimizes the pleasure in the thing that is gained, though there also seems to be an accompanying relief in finally making the choice.
Indeed, I believe that one of the reasons that maximizers are less happy, less satisfied with their lives, and more depressed than satisficers is precisely because the taint of trade-offs and opportunity costs washes out much that should be satisfying about the decisions they make.
The bitter taste of regret detracts from the satisfaction we get, whether or not the 148 | The Paradox of Choice regret is justified.
So it seems that we dont close the psychological door on the decisions weve 150 | The Paradox of Choice made, and as time passes, what weve failed to do looms larger and larger.
152 | A The Paradox of Choice Regret and the World of Counterfactuals and Hypotheticals ND WHAT MAKES THE PROBLEM OF REGRET MUCH WORSE IS THAT such thinking is not restricted to objective reality.
Without the ability to imagine a world that is different from our actual world and then to act to bring this imagined world into being, we never would have survived as a species, much less advanced through the millions of stages of speculation and trial and error that is the history of human progress.
When asked to imagine an automobile accident that involves someone who is speeding while driving on a rainy day with poor visibility, respondents are much more likely to undo the accident by having the driver be more cautious than by having the day be clear and dry.
The fact that counterfactual thinking seems to hone in on the controllable aspects of a situation only increases the chances that a 154 | The Paradox of Choice person will experience regret when engaging in counterfactual thinking.
156 | The Paradox of Choice And as we saw in the last chapter, if the number of candidates from which the choice is made goes up, each having some attractive feature that the chosen candidate does not, the opportunity costs (and the counterfactual thoughts and the smidgens of regret) mount higher and higher.
So if, by engaging in the careful decision-making process and trade-off assessment I discussed in the last chapter, you bring to mind all the wonderful things a seaside vacation might have included but didnt, there will be no shortage of negatives to occupy your mind, even if the vacation was good.
If a person comes right out of a sauna and jumps into a swimming pool, the water in the pool feels really cold, because of the contrast between the water temperature and the temperature in the sauna.
What Regret Makes Us Do U N L I K E O T H E R N E G AT I V E E M O T I O N S  A N G E R , S A D N E S S , D I S A P - pointment, even griefwhat is so difficult about regret is the feeling that the regrettable state of affairs could have been avoided and that it could have been avoided by you, if only you had chosen differently.
When it comes to taking vacations, nothing compares to the smell of the ocean and the sound of the surf.
So, for example, if given the option between a sure $100 and a fifty-fifty chance to gain $200, most of us will take the sure thing, because, subjectively, $200 is not twice 158 | The Paradox of Choice as good as $100, and thus not worth the fifty-fifty risk.
If this thinking is correct, then it should make a difference to tell someone that if they choose the guaranteed $100, you will still flip the coin and let them know whether they would have won or lost on the riskier proposition.
If youre trying to decide whether to buy a Toyota Camry or a Honda Accord and your closest friend just bought an Accord, youre likely to buy one too, partly because the only way to avoid the information that you made a mis- If Only .
Once we join the distant club, all the reasons for not 160 | The Paradox of Choice joining go out the window and we are left regretting our initial failure to act.
Having bought the shoes, you keep them in the closet even though you know youre never going to put them on again, because to give the shoes away or throw them away would force you to acknowledge a loss.
Then the researchers simply kept track of how often the ticket purchasers actually attended the plays over the course of the season.
The reason for this, the researchers argued, was that the full-price payers would feel worse about wasting money if they didnt use the tickets than would the discount payers.
: The Problem of Regret | 161 the ticket holders should be asking themselves on the night of the performance is, Will I get more satisfaction out of a night at the theater or out of a night spent reading and listening to music at home?
What leads me to believe that sunk-cost effects are motivated by the desire to avoid regret rather than just the desire to avoid a loss is that sunk-cost effects are much bigger when a person bears responsibility for the initial decision (to buy the ski tickets or the expensive shoes).
Many people persist in very troubled relationships not because of love or what they owe the other person or because they feel a moral obligation to honor vows, but because of all the time and effort theyve already put in.
The questions that should have been asked (all moral and political considerations about the appropriateness of the war aside) concerned the prospects of soldiers and civilians who were still alive.
And as the number of options continues to proliferate, making an exhaustive investigation of the possibilities impossible, concern that there may be a better option out there may induce you to anticipate the regret you will feel later on, when that option is discovered, and thus prevent you from making a decision at all.
When considering a decision involving complex possibilities, the fact that there is no one option that is best in all respects will induce people to consider the opportunity costs associated with choosing the best option.
Still, for people who are so plagued by regret that they cant let go of decisions in the past and have enormous difficulty making decisions in the present, taking steps to reduce regret could be extremely beneficial to their well-being.
In Chapter 11, we will discuss a general approach to coping with a world of choice, and many of these methods have the direct effect of diminishing our tendency to regret.
An experience that boosts our hedonic or pleasure temperature by say 20 degrees at the first encounter may Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 169 boost it by only 15 degrees the next time, by 10 degrees the time after that, and eventually it may stop boosting it at all.
H Changed Response to a Persistent Event and Changed Reference Point EDONIC ADAPTATION C AN BE THE SIMPLE GETTING USED T O I JUST described, or it can be the result of a change in reference point, owing to a new experience.
But as time passes, and the winners and the accident victims get used to their new circumstances, the hedonic thermometers in both groups begin to converge, becoming much more like the population at large.
Second, the new standard of whats a good experience (winning the lottery) may make many of the ordinary pleasures of daily life (the smell of freshly brewed coffee, the new blooms and refreshing breezes of a lovely spring day) rather tame by comparison.
The immediate aftermath of the accident is crushing, because these accident victims have lived their lives as mobile individuals and they possess none of the skills that enable paraplegics to negotiate in the environment.
Much of the research that has been done to assess the accuracy of peoples predictions about their future feelings has taken this form: One group of participants is asked to imagine some event 174 | The Paradox of Choice good or badand then to answer questions about how that event would make them feel.
Then the predictions of the first group are compared to the experiences of the second group.
The participants in the study were somewhat mindful of adaptation effects, and, accordingly, they expected to be extremely happy (or sad) when the decision was made, but that this joy or sadness would dissipate somewhat over time.
Elderly patients suffering from 176 | The Paradox of Choice a variety of the most common debilitating illnesses of advanced age reliably judge the quality of their lives more positively than do the physicians who are treating them.
T Adaptation and the Choice Problem HE AB UNDANCE OF CHOICE AVAILABLE TO US EXACERB ATES THE problem of adaptation by increasing the costs, in time and effort, of making a decision.
Time, effort, opportunity costs, anticipated Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 177 regret, and the like are fixed costs that we pay up front in making a decision, and those costs then get amortized over the life of the decision.
So the more choices we have, the more effort goes into our decisions, and the more we expect to enjoy the benefits of those decisions.
But adaptation is so fundamental and universal a feature of our responses to events in the worldit is so much a hardwired property of our nervous systemsthat there is very little we can do to mitigate it directly.
The Paradox of Choice Hopes, Expectations, Past Experience, and the Experience of Others HEN PEOPLE EVALUATE AN EXPERIENCE, THEY ARE PERFORMING one or more of the following comparisons: Comparing the experience to what they hoped it would be 2.
Comparing the experience to experiences that others have had Each of these comparisons makes the evaluation of an experience relative, and this may diminish the experience or enhance it.
If, in contrast, someone stumbles into the first restaurant she sees because shes very hungry, and if the place looks modest and its menu is simple, and if she had an awful dinner out the day before, and if her friend told her about a recent culinary disaster, chances are she wont be too hard to please.
The same meal, in the same restaurant, can be Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 183 judged negatively on the basis of the first set of comparisons and positively on the basis of the second.
And by and large, we are unlikely to realize that our evaluations are as much a commentary on what we bring to the meal as they are on the meal itself.
Social scientist Alex Michalos, in his discussion of the perceived quality of experience, argued that people establish standards of satisfaction based on the assessment of three gaps: the gap between what one has and wants, the gap between what one has and thinks others like oneself have, and the gap between what one has and the best one has had in the past.
The hedonic treadmill and the satisfaction treadmill that I discussed in the last chapter explain to a significant degree how real income can increase by a factor of two (in the U.S.) or five (in Japan) without having a measurable effect on the subjective well-being of the members of society.
But the language of description is not the only factor that affects the setting of the zero point.
No matter how frustrating it is for people to get prompt and decent health care in the age of managed care, there is no question that the state of American health is better than its ever been.
What contributes to high expectations, above and beyond the quality of past experience, is, I think, the amount of choice and control we now have over most aspects of our lives.
Because of this, and because of the role played by expectations in hedonic evaluations, an experience that is on the positive side of the hedonic thermometer for a satisficer may be on the negative side for a maximizer.
Better to be the third-highest-paid lawyer in a small firm and make $120,000 a year than to be in the middle of the pack in a large firm and make $150,000.
The way to be happythe way to succeed in the quest for statusis to find the right pond and stay in it.
They were asked to choose between an IQ of 110 when the IQ of others is 90 and an IQ of 130 when the IQ of others is 150.
This essentially universal and unrealistically high standard of comparison decreases the satisfaction of those of us who are in the middle or below, even as the actual circumstances of our lives improve.
As I mentioned in Chapter 4, economist Fred Hirsch argued in his book Social Limits to Growth that while technological development may continue to increase the number of people who can be fed from an acre of farmland or the number of children who can be Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 193 inoculated against polio for $1,000, there are certain kinds of goods that no amount of technological development will make universally available.
But as more and more people use these areas, they become so crowded that there is barely room to lie down, they become so noisy that people can hardly hear themselves think, they become so dirty that it is no longer pleasant even to look at them, and the highways that lead to them turn into parking lots.
Under these conditions, the only way to get the kind of beach experience you want is to travel much farther from the city, which is time-consuming, or to own your own beach, which is expensive.
If a participant got negative S U B J E C T I V E H A P P I N E S S S C A L E For each of the following statements and/or questions, please circle the point on the scale that you feel is most appropriate in describing you.
In the research I discussed in Chapter 4, we took participants who had filled out our Maximization Scale, and put them in a situation like the one I just described, in which they had to unscramble anagrams alongside another person who was doing the task faster or slower than they were.
The more difficult information gathering 200 | The Paradox of Choice is, the more likely it is that you will rely on the decisions of others.
But the more social comparison you do, the more likely you are to be affected by it, and the direction of such effects tends to be negative.
So by forcing us to look around at what others are doing before we make decisions, the world of bountiful options is encouraging a process that will often, if not always, leave us feeling worse about our decisions than we would if we hadnt engaged in the process to begin with.
While the American gross domestic product, a primary measure of prosperity, more than doubled in the last thirty years, the proportion of the population describing itself as very happy declined.
The most dramatic manifestation of this decrease in societal happiness is in the prevalence of clinical depression, at the opposite end of the happiness continuum.
The symptoms of depression include  Loss of interest or pleasure in routine daily activities, including work and family  Loss of energy, fatigue  Feelings of worthlessness, guilt, and self-blame  Indecisiveness  Inability to concentrate or think clearly  Recurrent thoughts of death, including thoughts of suicide  Insomnia  Loss of interest in sex  Loss of interest in food  Sadness: feelings of helplessness, hopelessness  Low self-esteem Aside from the obvious fact that victims of depression are miserably unhappy, depression also takes a major toll on society in general.
The animals typically learn this quickly and easily, but a group of animals that were exposed to the task after having experienced a series of unavoidable shocks failed to learn.
Especially striking was the parallel between the passivity of helpless animals and the passivity of depressed people, who sometimes find trivial tasks like deciding what to wear in the morning overwhelming.
Seligman speculated that at least some instances of clinical depression were the result of individuals having experienced one significant loss of control over their lives and then coming to believe that they were helpless, that they could expect this helplessness to persist into the future and to be present across a wide range of different circumstances.
These figures were not visible to the infants, but if the infants turned their heads on the pillows, a small light would go on behind the umbrella, making the dancing figures visible for a little while.
Whenever a control infant turned on the light behind the umbrella in its crib, that action also turned on the light behind the umbrella in the crib of another infant.
The significance of control to well-being was also dramatically demonstrated by a study of people at the opposite end of the life cycle.
One group of nursing home residents was given instruction on the importance of being able to take responsibility for themselves in the home, and a second group was given instruction about how important it was for the staff to take good care of them.
The first group was also given several mundane choices to make every day and a plant to take care of in their rooms, while members of the second group had no such choices and had their plants cared for by the staff.
What Seligman and his colleagues proposed was that when people are looking for causes for failure, they display a variety of predispositions to accept one type of cause or another, quite apart from what the actual cause of the failure might be.
If your rsum is unimpressive and you choke at interviews, if youre a passive kind of person, and if you believe that the last job was really available for the right person (not you), then your expectations for the future are pretty bleak.
In a study comparing rates in 1990 to rates in the 1970s and 1980s, UNICEF found that the incidence of suicide tripled in France, more than doubled in Norway, doubled in Australia, and increased by 50 percent or more in Canada, England, 210 | The Paradox of Choice and the U.S. Only in Japan and what was then West Germany did youth suicide go down.
The more we are allowed to be the masters of our fates, the more we expect ourselves to be.
In the last chapter we saw that the amount of pleasure and satisfaction we derive from experience has as much to do with how the experience relates to expectations as it does with the qualities of the experience itself.
A Rising Individualism and Self-Blame LONG WITH THE PERVASIVE RISE IN EXPECTATIONS , AMERIC AN CUL- ture has also become more individualistic than it was, perhaps as a by-product of the desire to have control over every aspect of life.
That is, the culture has established a kind of offi- 212 | The Paradox of Choice cially acceptable style of causal explanation, and it is one that encourages the individual to blame himself for failure.
And in this context it is relevant that the incidence of depression among the Amish of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, is less than 20 percent of the national rate.
For the Amish, the unease that the rest of us may feel at the prospect of significant communal obligation is largely absent.
Even more significant for the present discussion is that in cultures that adopt the ultrathin ideal, the rate of depression in women is twice that in men.
The (admittedly speculative) connection between thinness and depression is this: body weight is something people are supposed to 214 | The Paradox of Choice control, and to look perfect is to be thin.
When efforts to be thin fail, people not only have to face the daily disappointment of looking in the mirror, they also must face the causal explanation that this failure to look perfect is their fault.
Maximizers will put the most work into their decisions and have the highest expectations about the results of those decisions, and thus will be the most disappointed.
Choice, Disappointment, and Depression | 215 you make fails to live up to expectations and aspirations, and if you consistently take personal responsibility for the disappointments, then the trivial looms larger and larger, and the conclusion that you cant do anything right becomes devastating.
The Psychology of Autonomy and the Ecology of Autonomy P ARADOXIC ALLY, EVEN AT A TIME AND PLACE WHEN EXCESSIVE expectations of and aspirations for control are contributing to an epidemic of depression, those who feel that they have control are in better psychological shape than those who dont.
To understand this, we need to make a distinction between what is good for the individual and what is good for the society as a whole, between the psychology of personal autonomy and the ecology of personal autonomy.
Rather it is the result of a complex interaction among many psychological processes that permeate our culture, including rising expectations, awareness of opportunity costs, aversion to trade-offs, adaptation, regret, self-blame, the tendency to engage in social comparisons, and maximizing.
In the next chapter, we will review and amplify the recommendations weve made throughout the book, exploring what individuals can do, despite societal pressure, to overcome the overload of choice.
Choose When to Choose S WE HAVE SEEN, HAVING THE OPPORTUNITY TO CHOOSE IS ESSEN - tial for well-being, but choice has negative features, and the negative features escalate as the number of choices increases.
The key thing to appreciate, though, is that what is most important to us, most of the time, is not the objective results of decisions, but the subjective results.
If the ability to choose enables you to get a better car, house, job, vacation, or coffeemaker, but the process of choice makes you feel worse about what youve chosen, you really havent gained anything from the opportunity to choose.
This exercise may help you better appreciate the costs associated with the decisions you make, which may lead you to give up some decisions altogether or at least to establish rules of thumb for yourself about how many options to consider, or how much time and energy to invest in choosing.
But if youve been convinced by the arguments and the evidence in this book, you now know that choice has a downside, an awareness that should 224 | The Paradox of Choice make it easier for you to adopt, and live with, a two options is my limit rule.
Be a Chooser, Not a Picker HOOSERS ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE ABLE T O REFLECT ON WHAT MAKES a decision important, on whether, perhaps, none of the options should be chosen, on whether a new option should be created, and on what a particular choice says about the chooser as an individual.
The trick is to learn to embrace and appreciate satisficing, to cultivate it in more and more aspects of life, rather than merely being resigned to it.
Because I make a fairly large number of longdistance phone calls and because I was being deluged with unsolicited advertisements from various companies, I found it hard to resist the temptation to try to find the absolute best company and plan for my calling habits.
Given that thinking about the attractiveness of unchosen options will always detract from the satisfaction derived from the chosen one, it is tempting to suggest that we forget about opportunity costs altogether, but often it is difficult or impossible to judge how good an option is except in relation to other options.
When a decision is final, we engage in a variety of psychological processes that enhance our feelings about the choice we made rela- What to Do About Choice | 229 tive to the alternatives.
These objects of gratitude occasionally will be big (a job promotion, a great first date), but most of the time, they will be small (sunlight streaming in through the bedroom window, a kind word from a friend, a piece of swordfish cooked just the way you like it, an informative article in a magazine).
Our challenge is to remember that the high-quality sound system, the luxury car, and the tenthousand-square-foot house wont keep providing the pleasure they give when we first experience them.
Stop paying so much attention to how others around you are doing is easy advice to give, but hard advice to follow, because the evidence of how others are doing is pervasive, because most of us seem to care a great deal about status, and finally, because access to some of the most important things in life (for example, the best colleges, the best jobs, the best houses in the best neighborhoods) is granted only to those who do better than their peers.
Following the other suggestions Ive made may sometimes mean that when judged by an absolute standard, the results of decisions will be less good than they might otherwise have beenall the more reason to fight the tendency to make social comparisons.
But in the long run, many of the daily hassles will vanish, and we will find ourselves with time, energy, and attention for the decisions we have chosen to retain.
