Some were fat-free, others werent.
But this freedom may come at a price.
Mature women also say they like shopping, but working women say that shopping is a hassle, as do Lets Go Shopping | 19 most men.
If we dont like shopping at the supermarket, for example, we can just get it over with, and buy what we always buy, ignoring the alternatives.
Second, we have a tendency to look around at what others are doing and use them as a standard of comparison.
Its core idea is that we have too many choices, too many decisions, too little time to do what is really important.
It is precisely so that we can, each of us, focus on our own wants that all of these choices emerged in the first place.
As evidence of this conflicted desire, it turns out that many people, though happy about the availability of telephone choices or electric choices, dont really make them.
I dont mean choice of doctors; weve always had that (if we arent among the nations poor), and with managed care, we surely have less of it than we had before.
Even if I made what I was sure was the right choice for her, I could not live with the guilt if something went wrong .
Though as many as 65 percent of people surveyed say that if they were to get cancer, they would want to choose their own treatment, in fact, among people who do get cancer, only 12 percent actually want to do so.
And what makes it overwhelming is not only that the decision is ours, but that the number of sources of information from which we are to make the decisions has exploded.
And this means that whether or not we work has become a matter of hour-by-hour, minute-by-minute choice.
Here, too, it seems that every day we face a choice.
Even how we dress for work has taken on a new element of choice, and with it, new anxieties.
So we got the freedom to make an individual choice about how to dress on a given day, but for many, that choice entailed more complications than it was worth.
Next came a series of career-related choices.
A range of life choices has been available to Americans for quite some time.
Whom we married was a matter of choice, but we knew that we would do it as soon as we could and have children, because that was something all people did.
Today, all romantic possibilities are on the table; all choices are real.
But as with marriage, choice of identity has been moving from a state in which the default option was extremely powerful and the fact of choice had little psychological reality to a state in which choice is very real and salient.
His point was that everything in life is choice.
If New Choices | 43 thats true, then what can it mean to suggest, as I have in these first two chapters, that we face more choices and more decisions today than ever before?
If it were up to us to choose whether or not to have choice, we would opt for choice almost every time.
As the number of options increases, the effort required to make a good decision escalates as well, which is one of the reasons that choice can be transformed from a blessing into a burden.
You have to pick a restaurant, a CD, or a movie, and you make these choices based upon how you expect the experiences to make you feel.
But more than anything else, we get information from advertising.
But we need to know that the information is reliable, and we need to have enough time to get through all the information thats available.
If people want real information, they have to go beyond advertising to disinterested sources such as Consumer Reports.
E Evaluating the Information VEN IF WE C AN ACCURATELY DETERMINE WHAT WE WANT AND THEN find good information, in a quantity we can handle, do we really know how to analyze, sift, weigh, and evaluate it to arrive at the right conclusions and make the right choices?
Because our own actions are more available to us from memory, we assume they are more frequent.
What often saves us from our faulty decision-making process is that different people experience different vivid or salient events, and thus have different events available to memory.
And when such comparisons are easy to make, shoppers follow through and act on the information.
Or suppose you are one of a large group of participants in a study and for your time and trouble, you are given either a coffee mug or a nice pen.
And, as prospect theory tells us, because losses are more bad than gains are good, the mug or pen with which you have been endowed is worth more to you than it is to a potential trading partner.
Aversion to losses also leads people to be sensitive to what are called sunk costs.
Unfortunately, the proliferation of choice in our lives robs us of the opportunity to decide for ourselves just how important any given decision is.
In the end, they are likely to get less satisfaction out of the exquisite choices they make than will satisficers.
The more they agreed, the more they were maximizers.
No matter what I do, I have the highest standards for myself.
| 83 No matter what I do, I have the highest standards for myself.
Maximizers spend more time than satisficers comparing their purchasing decisions to the decisions of others.
Does it follow that maximizers are less happy than satisficers?
A final questionnaire measured depression, and asked people how sad they felt, how much satisfaction they got out of various activities, how much interest they had in other people, and what they thought of their appearance, among other things.
In fact, people with extreme maximization scoresscores of 65 or more out of 91had depression scores that placed them in the borderline clinical depression range.
If youre a satisficer and you choose something thats good enough to meet your standards, you are less likely to care if something better is just around the corner.
Its hard to go through life regretting every decision you make because it might not have been the best possible decision.
And its easy to see that if you experience regret on a regular basis, it will rob you of at least some of the satisfaction that your good decisions warrant.
What is even worse is that you can actually experience regret in anticipation of making a decision.
If I make a choice and it turns out well, I still feel like something of a failure if I find out that another choice would have turned out better.
Whenever I make a choice, I try to get information about how the other alternatives turned out.
Since maximizers have higher standards than satisficers, one would think that they end up with better things.
What becomes clear about satisfaction or preferences as they are experienced in real life is that they are subjective, not objective.
Satisficers may have very high standards.
You will not experience the kind of satisfaction with your choices that satisficers will.
While maximizers and perfectionists both have very high standards, I think that perfectionists have very high standards that they dont When Only the Best Will Do | 91 expect to meet, whereas maximizers have very high standards that they do expect to meet.
Perfectionists may not be as happy with the results of their actions as they should be, but they seem to be happier with the results of their actions than maximizers are with the results of theirs.
I stick to the brands I know and do my best to ignore new choices on the market.
When I finally make a choice, I think about the items Ive passed up.
I second-guess myself, and I often regret my decision, not because it turns out badly, but because I suspect that a different decision might have turned out better.
This is good news, because what it means is that most of us have the capacity to be satisficers.
In fact, the more options there are, the more likely When Only the Best Will Do | 93 it is that the satisficer will find one that meets his or her standards.
They might be aware that they have trouble making decisions and that they fear they will regret decisions and that they often derive little lasting satisfaction from the decisions they have made, but all with no conscious awareness of what is at the root of the problem.
So it is possible that some people are aware of the negative side of being maximizers, but that they feel compelled by circumstance to be maximizers nonetheless.
Throughout this chapter, I have been talking about maximizing and the number of options people face as if the two were indepen- 96 | The Paradox of Choice dent of each other.
If this is true, then the proliferation of options not only makes people who are maximizers miserable, but it may also make people who are satisficers into maximizers.
Studies comparing the well-being of people living in different cultures have shown that substantial differences between cultures in the consumption opportunities they make available to people have very small effects on peoples satisfaction with their lives.
Nonetheless, though modern Americans have more choice than any group of people ever has before, and thus, presumably, more freedom and autonomy, we dont seem to be benefiting from it psychologically.
As important as the instrumental value of choice may be, choice reflects another value that might be even more important.
Freedom to choose has what might be called expressive value.
Or maybe even I wear what I want and I dont care what you think about it.
Take voting, for example.
Every choice we make is a testament to our autonomy, to our sense of self-determination.
Now think about the relation between helplessness and choice.
If we have choices in a particular situation, then we should be able to exert control over that situation, and thus we should be protected from helplessness.
104 | The Paradox of Choice The first is that, as the experience of choice and control gets broader and deeper, expectations about choice and control may rise to match that experience.
The choice of when to be a chooser may be the most important choice we have to make.
If, instead of looking at happiness across nations at a given time, we look within a nation at different times, we find the same story.
The percentage of homes with air-conditioning has Choice and Happiness | 107 increased from 15 percent to 73 percent.
Being connected to others seems to be much more important to subjective well-being than being rich.
So it is at least possible that happiness comes first and close relations come second.
In the context of this discussion of choice and autonomy, it is also important to note that, in many ways, social ties actually decrease freedom, choice, and autonomy.
But, as Lane put it very simply, in addition to the other factors contributing to our modern malaise: There are too many life choices .
I have also suggested that in modern societies we have more choice, and thus more control, than people have ever had before.
Put these two pieces of information together, and it might lead you to expect that depression is going the way of polio, with 110 | The Paradox of Choice autonomy and choice as the psychological vaccines.
Then can it be that freedom of choice is not all its cracked up to be?
If we fail in establishing exactly the kinds of social relations we want, we will feel that we have only ourselves to blame.
Having the discipline to live by the rules you make for yourself is, of course, another matter, but one things for sure: following rules eliminates troublesome choices in your daily life, each time you get into a car or each time you go to a cocktail party.
We dont make a choice, every day, about whether to maintain the friendship; we just do.
So by using rules, presumptions, standards, and routines to constrain ourselves and limit the decisions we face, we can make life more manageable, which gives us more time to devote ourselves to other people and to the decisions that we cant or dont want to avoid.
Remember that 65 percent of people who didnt have cancer said that if they got it, they would prefer to choose their treatment.
Of those who actually had cancer, 88 percent said they would prefer not to choose.
Apparently we always think we want choice, but when we actually get it, we may not like it.
Nonetheless, if she lists the things that matter to her, determines how much they matter, and evaluates how each possibility measures up, Angela will be able to make a choice.
If being with friends is nice, being with family is nicer.
The necessity of making trade-offs alters how we feel about the decisions we face; more important, it affects the level of satisfaction we experience from the decisions we ultimately make.
Every choice we make has opportunity costs associated with it.
Thinking about opportunity costs may not change the decision you make, but it will give you a more realistic assessment of the full implications of that decision.
If we assume that opportunity costs take away from the overall desirability of the most-preferred option and that we will feel the opportunity costs associated with many of the options we reject, then the more alternatives there are from which to choose, the greater our experience of the opportunity costs will be.
And the greater our experience of the opportunity costs, the less satisfaction we will derive from our chosen alternative.
Surprisingly, however, 73 percent go with the Sony, as opposed to 66 percent when it was offered by itself.
Once again, this suggests that whenever we are forced to make decisions involving trade-offs, we will feel less good about the option we choose than we would have if the alternatives hadnt been there.
When magazines are evaluated as part of a group, each of them will both gain and lose from the comparisons.
We just dont want to have to evaluate trade-offs ourselves.
Because we dont put rejected options out of our minds, we Missed Opportunities | 133 experience the disappointment of having our satisfaction with decisions diluted by all the options we considered but did not choose.
And once we start considering alternatives, the matter of opportunity costs is bound to come up.
Similarly, with regard to essay topics, some may be attractive because students already know a lot about them, others because they are provocative, others because they have personal relevance, and still others because they relate to ideas students are discussing in another course.
Some years ago, when my wife and I made a trip to Paris for a long weekend, I had an experience that I couldnt understand until I began to write this chapter.
As I encountered one attractive alternative after another, each new alternative just reduced the potential pleasure I would feel after I made my choice.
This created a problem for me, especially when I had to be the one to choose a movie that my family or friends would watch together.
With fewer options and more constraints, many trade-offs would be eliminated, and there would be less self-doubt, less of an effort to justify decisions, more satisfaction, and less second-guessing of the decisions once made.
the question people asked themselves was more like Should I take it or leave it?
Now yes or no will no longer do the job.
We think of trade-offs as hurting less and opportunity costs as less troublesome, if we know that we can change our minds when it looks like weve made a mistake.
A series of recent studies gave some people a choice that was reversible and others a choice that was nonreversible.
However, those who had the option to change their minds were less satisfied with their choices than participants who did not have that option.
Good enough can survive thinking about opportunity costs.
Indeed, I believe that one of the reasons that maximizers are less happy, less satisfied with their lives, and more depressed than satisficers is precisely because the taint of trade-offs and opportunity costs washes out much that should be satisfying about the decisions they make.
: The Problem of Regret  A NYTIME YOU MAKE A DECISION AND IT DOESNT TURN OUT WELL or you find an alternative that would have turned out better, youre a candidate for regret.
Do we regret having been taken?
Recall that when my colleagues and I measured individual differences in regret, we found that people with high regret scores are less happy, less satisfied with life, less optimistic, and more depressed than those with low regret scores.
Indeed, we think that concern about regret is a major reason that individuals are maximizers.
The only way to be sure that you wont regret a decision is by making the best possible decision.
And once again, the more options you have, the more likely it is that you will experience regret, either in anticipation of decisions or after them.
Which may be a major reason why adding choices to our lives doesnt always make us better off.
Even though there are differences among individuals in sensitivity to regret, some circumstances are more likely to trigger regret than others.
But when asked about what they regret most when they look back on their lives as a whole, people tend to identify failures to act.
What is it that youll regret?
What is important about this picture is that the more that our experiences result from our own choices, the more regret we will feel if things dont turn out as we had hoped.
So although adding options may make it easier for us to choose something we really like, it will also make it easier for us to regret choices that dont live up to our hopes or expectations.
But the downside of counterfactual thinking is that it fuels regret, both postdecision regret and anticipated regret.
A Regret and Satisfaction S WE HAVE SEEN, REGRET WILL MAKE US FEEL WORSE AFTER DECI- sionseven ones that work outthan we otherwise would, especially when we take opportunity costs into consideration.
Opportunity costs capture the benefits that would have come as a result of a different choice, and as soon as you return from that seaside vacation, the counterfactual thinking may begin.
If only they had better restaurants there, it would have been perfect.
156 | The Paradox of Choice And as we saw in the last chapter, if the number of candidates from which the choice is made goes up, each having some attractive feature that the chosen candidate does not, the opportunity costs (and the counterfactual thoughts and the smidgens of regret) mount higher and higher.
By thinking about what you will give up by going to the seaside, by imagining opportunity costs in advance, it seems inevitable that the anticipated regret induced by these thoughts will make the most attractive option seem less attractive.
: The Problem of Regret | 157 who are maximizers than for people who are satisficers.
It is the maximizers who will have these counterfactual perfect options in mind, which will make any real-world option pale by comparison.
In the last chapter we saw that individuals facing decisions involving trade-offs, and thus opportunities for regret, will avoid making those decisions altogether.
Or if they cant avoid the decisions completely, they will construe them so that they no longer seem to involve trade-offs.
And so on.
So youll have no reason to regret your decision to take the sure thing.
Under these conditions, people can no longer avoid the possibility of regret no matter which option they choose.
Studies like this show that not only is regret an important consequence of many decisions, but that the prospect of regret is an important cause of many decisions.
If we do sign up, we can no longer tell ourselves that we dont fly enough and it isnt worth the trouble; instead, we can only regret not having signed up earlier.
I mentioned them as an example of what are called sunk costs.
And as the number of options continues to proliferate, making an exhaustive investigation of the possibilities impossible, concern that there may be a better option out there may induce you to anticipate the regret you will feel later on, when that option is discovered, and thus prevent you from making a decision at all.
When considering a decision involving complex possibilities, the fact that there is no one option that is best in all respects will induce people to consider the opportunity costs associated with choosing the best option.
And with each if only you generate will come a little more regret and a little less satisfaction with the choice you actually made.
It should also be clear that the problem of regret will loom larger for maximizers than for satisficers.
First, antici- pating that we may regret a decision may induce us to take the decision seriously and to imagine the various scenarios that may follow it.
Because so many of the decisions we make have consequences for others, a If Only .
If you decide to take a job 2,500 miles away from your family, it is appropriate to regret having been put in the position of trading off a good job opportunity against family ties, even if the decision works out well.
In this case it is hedonic adaptation, or adaptation to pleasure.
Even though we dont expect it to happen, such adaptation to pleasure is inevitable, and it may cause more disappointment in a world of many choices than in a world of few.
Novelty can change someones hedonic standards so that what was once good enough, or even better than that, no longer is.
And what is even more surprising is that the accident victims, while somewhat less happy than people in general, still judged themselves to be happy.
And if you had asked accident victims how happy they were right after they suffered their disability, they would have been as low as can be.
And because Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 173 of adaptation, no matter how good your choices and how pleasurable the results, you still end up back where you started in terms of subjective experience.
In one study of this type, college students in the Midwest were asked how it would feel to live in California.
Even with adaptation in mind, the predictors substantially overestimated how good a positive decision would make them feel and how bad a negative decision would make them feel in the long run.
When they have children, they are making predictions about their enduring feelings about family life.
Time, effort, opportunity costs, anticipated Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 177 regret, and the like are fixed costs that we pay up front in making a decision, and those costs then get amortized over the life of the decision.
So the more choices we have, the more effort goes into our decisions, and the more we expect to enjoy the benefits of those decisions.
It should also be obvious that the phenomenon of adaptation will have more profound effects on people who set out to maximize than it will on people who are aiming for good enough.
It is maximizers who make a really big investment in each of their decisions, who agonize most about trade-offs.
And so it is maximizers who will be most disappointed when they discover the pleasure they derive from their decisions to be short-lived.
A world with multiple options may make possible better objective choices than a world with few options.
If adaptation saddles people with a subjective experience of their choices that doesnt justify the effort that went into making those choices, people will begin to see choice not as a liberator but as a burden.
While we dont get to do and to have everything we want, no other people on earth have ever had such control over their lives, such material abundance, and such freedom of choice.
Factoring in adaptation may help us be satisfied with choices that are good enough rather than the best, and this in turn will reduce the time and effort we devote to making those choices.
For purposes of making decisions about what to do in the future, the Was it good or bad?
question is less important than How good or bad was it?
The Paradox of Choice Hopes, Expectations, Past Experience, and the Experience of Others HEN PEOPLE EVALUATE AN EXPERIENCE, THEY ARE PERFORMING one or more of the following comparisons: Comparing the experience to what they hoped it would be 2.
Comparing the experience to experiences that others have had Each of these comparisons makes the evaluation of an experience relative, and this may diminish the experience or enhance it.
As our material and social circumstances improve, our standards of comparison go up.
They talked about too-muchness: too many activities, too many consumer choices, too much to learn.
One part of life where the curse of high expectations is apparent 186 | The Paradox of Choice is health and health care.
No matter how frustrating it is for people to get prompt and decent health care in the age of managed care, there is no question that the state of American health is better than its ever been.
What contributes to high expectations, above and beyond the quality of past experience, is, I think, the amount of choice and control we now have over most aspects of our lives.
Almost by definition, to be a maximizer is to have high standards, high expectations.
Because of this, and because of the role played by expectations in hedonic evaluations, an experience that is on the positive side of the hedonic thermometer for a satisficer may be on the negative side for a maximizer.
We probably can do more to affect the quality of our lives by controlling our expectations than we can by doing virtually anything else.
O The Curse of Social Comparison F ALL THE SOURCES WE RELY ON WHEN WE EVALUATE EXPERIENCES , perhaps nothing is more important than comparisons to other people.
188 | The Paradox of Choice Social comparison provides information that helps people evaluate experiences.
Is your marriage going well?
People can compare themselves with others who have done better (upward social comparison) or worse (downward social comparison).
We have less control over social comparison.
If you live in a social world, as we all do, you are always being hit with information about how others are doing.
So instead of comparing ourselves to everyone, we try to mark off the world in such a way that in our pond, in comparison with our reference group, we are successful.
They were asked to choose between 12 years of education (high school) when others have 8, and 16 years of education (college) when others have 20.
But even if people could be taught to care less about status, they would still not be satisfied with what they have, because they have legitimate reasons for believing that no matter how much a person has, it may not be enough.
We might all agree that everyone would be better off if there were less positional competition.
Lyubomirsky found that happy people were only minimally affected by whether the person working next to them was better or worse at the anagram task than they were.
198 | Y The Paradox of Choice Maximizing, Satisficing, and Social Comparison OUR LEVEL OF HAPPINESS IS NOT THE ONLY FACT OR THAT COLORS your response to social comparison.
In the research I discussed in Chapter 4, we took participants who had filled out our Maximization Scale, and put them in a situation like the one I just described, in which they had to unscramble anagrams alongside another person who was doing the task faster or slower than they were.
We found that maximizers were much more affected by the presence of another person than satisficers were.
The social comparison information had no such effect on satisficers.
In addition, when maximizers and satisficers were asked questions about how they shop, maximizers reported being much more concerned with social comparison than satisficers did.
They were more attentive than satisficers to what other people were buying, and more influenced in judgments of their own satisfaction by the apparent satisfaction of others.
Maximizers want the best, but how do you know that you have the best, except by comparison?
Satisficers who are looking for results that are good enough can use the experiences of others to help them determine exactly what good enough is, but they dont Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 199 have to.
It is maximizers who have the relative standards and satisficers who have the absolute ones.
W Choice Options and Social Comparison E HAVE ALREADY SEEN HOW THE MORE OPTIONS WE HAVE, THE more difficulty we have gathering the information necessary to make a good decision.
The more difficult information gathering 200 | The Paradox of Choice is, the more likely it is that you will rely on the decisions of others.
But the more social comparison you do, the more likely you are to be affected by it, and the direction of such effects tends to be negative.
So by forcing us to look around at what others are doing before we make decisions, the world of bountiful options is encouraging a process that will often, if not always, leave us feeling worse about our decisions than we would if we hadnt engaged in the process to begin with.
Seligman speculated that at least some instances of clinical depression were the result of individuals having experienced one significant loss of control over their lives and then coming to believe that they were helpless, that they could expect this helplessness to persist into the future and to be present across a wide range of different circumstances.
The fundamental significance of having control was highlighted in a study of three-month-old infants done more than thirty years ago.
And I can do it again whenever I want.
Young infants have little control over anything.
If your rsum is unimpressive and you choke at interviews, if youre a passive kind of person, and if you believe that the last job was really available for the right person (not you), then your expectations for the future are pretty bleak.
And as well see, it is much easier to blame yourself for disappointing results in a world that provides unlimited choice than in a world in which options are limited.
In the past thirty-five years, the suicide rate among American college students has tripled.
With all the choice available, we should never have to settle for things that are just good enough.
In the last chapter we saw that the amount of pleasure and satisfaction we derive from experience has as much to do with how the experience relates to expectations as it does with the qualities of the experience itself.
The key fact about psychological life in societies in which you have little control over these aspects of life is that you also have little expectation of control.
And because of this, I think, lack of control does not lead to feelings of helplessness and depression.
If our attachments to others are serious, we cant just do whatever we want.
Do the Amish have less control over their lives than the rest of us?
Do they have less control than the rest of us compared to what they expect?
As they do in regard to missed opportunities, regret, adaptation, and social comparison, maximizers will suffer more from high expectations and self-blame than will satisficers.
Maximizers will put the most work into their decisions and have the highest expectations about the results of those decisions, and thus will be the most disappointed.
Among people who score highest on our Maximization Scale, scores on the standard measure of depression are in the borderline clinical depression range.
The Psychology of Autonomy and the Ecology of Autonomy P ARADOXIC ALLY, EVEN AT A TIME AND PLACE WHEN EXCESSIVE expectations of and aspirations for control are contributing to an epidemic of depression, those who feel that they have control are in better psychological shape than those who dont.
To understand this, we need to make a distinction between what is good for the individual and what is good for the society as a whole, between the psychology of personal autonomy and the ecology of personal autonomy.
We are free to be the authors of our own lives, but we dont know exactly what kind of lives we want to write.
Choose When to Choose S WE HAVE SEEN, HAVING THE OPPORTUNITY TO CHOOSE IS ESSEN - tial for well-being, but choice has negative features, and the negative features escalate as the number of choices increases.
If the ability to choose enables you to get a better car, house, job, vacation, or coffeemaker, but the process of choice makes you feel worse about what youve chosen, you really havent gained anything from the opportunity to choose.
This exercise may help you better appreciate the costs associated with the decisions you make, which may lead you to give up some decisions altogether or at least to establish rules of thumb for yourself about how many options to consider, or how much time and energy to invest in choosing.
As you go through the exercise of reviewing recent choices youve made, not only will you become more aware of associated costs, youll discover that there are some things you really care about, and others you dont.
Satisfice More and Maximize Less T IS MAXIMIZERS WHO SUFFER MOST IN A CULTURE THAT PROVIDES too many choices.
It is maximizers who have expectations that cant be met.
It is maximizers who worry most about regret, about missed opportunities, and about social comparisons, and it is maximizers who are most disappointed when the results of decisions are not as good as they expected.
Though satisficers may often do less well than maximizers according to certain objective standards, nonetheless, by settling for good enough even when the best could be just around the corner, satisficers will usually feel better about the decisions they make.
It makes regret less likely.
To become a satisficer, however, requires that you think carefully 226 | The Paradox of Choice about your goals and aspirations, and that you develop well-defined standards for what is good enough whenever you face a decision.
On the other hand, the more we think about opportunity costs, the less satisfaction well derive from whatever we choose.
When we decide to opt out of deciding in some area of life, we dont have to think about opportunity costs.
Because satisficers have their own standards for what is good enough, they are less dependent than maximizers on comparison among alternatives.
There are some strategies you can use to help you avoid the disappointment that comes from thinking about opportunity costs: 1.
I think the power of nonreversible decisions comes through most clearly when we think about our most important choices.
We can vastly improve our subjective experience by consciously striving to be grateful more often for what is good about a choice or an experience, and to be disappointed less by what is bad about it.
This is easier said than done, especially in a world that encourages high expectations and offers so many choices that it seems only reasonable to believe that some option out there will be perfect.
So by comparing ourselves to others less, we will be satisfied more.
Stop paying so much attention to how others around you are doing is easy advice to give, but hard advice to follow, because the evidence of how others are doing is pervasive, because most of us seem to care a great deal about status, and finally, because access to some of the most important things in life (for example, the best colleges, the best jobs, the best houses in the best neighborhoods) is granted only to those who do better than their peers.
Because it is easier for a satisficer to avoid social comparison than for a maximizer, learning that good enough is good enough may automatically reduce concern with how others are doing.
