CHAPTER ONE Lets Go Shopping  S A Day at the Supermarket C ANNING THE SHELVES OF MY LOC AL SUPERMARKET RECENTLY, I found 85 different varieties and brands of crackers.
As I read the packages, I discovered that some brands had sodium, others didnt.
Some were fat-free, others werent.
They came in big boxes and small ones.
They came in normal size and bite size.
There were mundane saltines and exotic and expensive imports.
My neighborhood supermarket is not a particularly large store, and yet next to the crackers were 285 varieties of cookies.
Among chocolate chip cookies, there were 21 options.
Among Goldfish (I dont know whether to count them as cookies or crackers), there were 20 different varieties to choose from.
Across the aisle were juices13 sports drinks, 65 box drinks for kids, 85 other flavors and brands of juices, and 75 iced teas and adult drinks.
I could get these tea drinks sweetened (sugar or artificial sweetener), lemoned, and flavored.
Next, in the snack aisle, there were 95 options in allchips (taco and potato, ridged and flat, flavored and unflavored, salted and unsalted, high fat, low fat, no fat), pretzels, and the like, including a dozen varieties of Pringles.
Nearby was seltzer, no doubt to wash 10 | The Paradox of Choice down the snacks.
Bottled water was displayed in at least 15 flavors.
In the pharmaceutical aisles, I found 61 varieties of suntan oil and sunblock, and 80 different pain relieversaspirin, acetaminophen, ibuprofen; 350 milligrams or 500 milligrams; caplets, capsules, and tablets; coated or uncoated.
There were 40 options for toothpaste, 150 lipsticks, 75 eyeliners, and 90 colors of nail polish from one brand alone.
There were 116 kinds of skin cream, and 360 types of shampoo, conditioner, gel, and mousse.
Next to them were 90 different cold remedies and decongestants.
Finally, there was dental floss: waxed and unwaxed, flavored and unflavored, offered in a variety of thicknesses.
Returning to the food shelves, I could choose from among 230 soup offerings, including 29 different chicken soups.
There were 16 varieties of instant mashed potatoes, 75 different instant gravies, 120 different pasta sauces.
Among the 175 different salad dressings were 16 Italian dressings, and if none of them suited me, I could choose from 15 extra-virgin olive oils and 42 vinegars and make my own.
There were 275 varieties of cereal, including 24 oatmeal options and 7 Cheerios options.
Across the aisle were 64 different kinds of barbecue sauce and 175 types of tea bags.
Heading down the homestretch, I encountered 22 types of frozen waffles.
And just before the checkout (paper or plastic; cash or credit or debit), there was a salad bar that offered 55 different items.
This brief tour of one modest store barely suggests the bounty that lies before todays middle-class consumer.
I left out the fresh fruits and vegetables (organic, semi-organic, and regular old fertilized and pesticized), the fresh meats, fish, and poultry (free-range organic chicken or penned-up chicken, skin on or off, whole or in pieces, seasoned or unseasoned, stuffed or empty), the frozen foods, the paper goods, the cleaning products, and on and on and on.
 The New Yorker Collection 1999 Roz Chast from cartoonbank.com.
All Rights Reserved.
12 | The Paradox of Choice A typical supermarket carries more than 30,000 items.
Thats a lot to choose from.
And more than 20,000 new products hit the shelves every year, almost all of them doomed to failure.
Comparison shopping to get the best price adds still another dimension to the array of choices, so that if you were a truly careful shopper, you could spend the better part of a day just to select a box of crackers, as you worried about price, flavor, freshness, fat, sodium, and calories.
But who has the time to do this?
Perhaps thats the reason consumers tend to return to the products they usually buy, not even noticing 75% of the items competing for their attention and their dollars.
Who but a professor doing research would even stop to consider that there are almost 300 different cookie options to choose among?
Supermarkets are unusual as repositories for what are called nondurable goods, goods that are quickly used and replenished.
So buying the wrong brand of cookies doesnt have significant emotional or financial consequences.
But in most other settings, people are out to buy things that cost more money, and that are meant to last.
And here, as the number of options increases, the psychological stakes rise accordingly.
C Shopping for Gadgets ONTINUING MY MISSION TO EXPLORE OUR RANGE OF CHOICES , I left the supermarket and stepped into my local consumer elec- tronics store.
Here I discovered:  45 different car stereo systems, with 50 different speaker sets to go with them.
 42 different computers, most of which could be customized in various ways.
Lets Go Shopping | 13  27 different printers to go with the computers.
 110 different televisions, offering high definition, flat screen, varying screen sizes and features, and various levels of sound quality.
 30 different VCRs and 50 different DVD players.
 20 video cameras.
 85 different telephones, not counting the cellular phones.
 74 different stereo tuners, 55 CD players, 32 tape players, and 50 sets of speakers.
(Given that these components could be mixed and matched in every possible way, that provided the opportunity to create 6,512,000 different stereo systems.)
And if you didnt have the budget or the stomach for configuring your own stereo system, there were 63 small, integrated systems to choose from.
Unlike supermarket products, those in the electronics store dont get used up so fast.
If we make a mistake, we either have to live with it or return it and go through the difficult choice process all over again.
Also, we really cant rely on habit to simplify our decision, because we dont buy stereo systems every couple of weeks and because technology changes so rapidly that chances are our last model wont exist when we go out to replace it.
At these prices, choices begin to have serious consequences.
M Shopping by Mail Y WIFE AND I RECEIVE ABOUT 20 C ATALOGS A WEEK IN THE MAIL.
We get catalogs for clothes, luggage, housewares, furniture, kitchen appliances, gourmet food, athletic gear, computer equipment, linens, bathroom furnishings, and unusual gifts, plus a few that are hard to classify.
These catalogs spread like a virusonce 14 | The Paradox of Choice youre on the mailing list for one, dozens of others seem to follow.
Buy one thing from a catalog and your name starts to spread from one mailing list to another.
From one month alone, I have 25 clothing catalogs sitting on my desk.
Opening just one of them, a summer catalog for women, we find  19 different styles of womens T-shirts, each available in 8 different colors,  10 different styles of shorts, each available in 8 colors,  8 different styles of chinos, available in 6 to 8 colors,  7 different styles of jeans, each available in 5 colors,  dozens of different styles of blouses and pants, each available in multiple colors,  9 different styles of thongs, each available in 5 or 6 colors.
And then there are bathing suits15 one-piece suits, and among two-piece suits:  7 different styles of tops, each in about 5 colors, combined with,  5 different styles of bottoms, each in about 5 colors (to give women a total of 875 different make your own two-piece possibilities).
T Shopping for Knowledge HESE DAYS , A TYPIC AL COLLEGE C ATALOG HAS MORE IN COMMON with the one from J.
Crew than you might think.
Most liberal arts colleges and universities now embody a view that celebrates freedom of choice above all else, and the modern university is a kind of intellectual shopping mall.
A century ago, a college curriculum entailed a largely fixed course of study, with a principal goal of educating people in their Lets Go Shopping | 15 ethical and civic traditions.
Education was not just about learning a disciplineit was a way of raising citizens with common values and aspirations.
Often the capstone of a college education was a course taught by the college president, a course that integrated the various fields of knowledge to which the students had been exposed.
But more important, this course was intended to teach students how to use their college education to live a good and an ethical life, both as individuals and as members of society.
This is no longer the case.
Now there is no fixed curriculum, and no single course is required of all students.
There is no attempt to teach people how they should live, for who is to say what a good life is?
When I went to college, thirty-five years ago, there were almost two years worth of general education requirements that all students had to complete.
We had some choices among courses that met those requirements, but they were rather narrow.
Almost every department had a single, freshman-level introductory course that prepared the student for more advanced work in the department.
You could be fairly certain, if you ran into a fellow student you didnt know, that the two of you would have at least a years worth of courses in common to discuss.
Today, the modern institution of higher learning offers a wide array of different goods and allows, even encourages, students the customersto shop around until they find what they like.
Individual customers are free to purchase whatever bundles of knowledge they want, and the university provides whatever its customers demand.
In some rather prestigious institutions, this shopping-mall view has been carried to an extreme.
In the first few weeks of classes, students sample the merchandise.
They go to a class, stay ten minutes to see what the professor is like, then walk out, often in the middle of the professors sentence, to try another class.
Students come and go in and out of classes just as browsers go 16 | The Paradox of Choice in and out of stores in a mall.
Youve got ten minutes, the students seem to be saying, to show me what youve got.
So give it your best shot. About twenty years ago, somewhat dismayed that their students no longer shared enough common intellectual experiences, the Harvard faculty revised its general education requirements to form a core curriculum. Students now take at least one course in each of seven different broad areas of inquiry.
Among those areas, there are a total of about 220 courses from which to choose.
Foreign Cultures has 32, Historical Study has 44, Literature and the Arts has 58, Moral Reasoning has 15, as does Social Analysis, Quantitative Reasoning has 25, and Science has 44.
What are the odds that two random students who bump into each other will have courses in common?
At the advanced end of the curriculum, Harvard offers about 40 majors.
For students with interdisciplinary interests, these can be combined into an almost endless array of joint majors.
And if that doesnt do the trick, students can create their own degree plan.
And Harvard is not unusual.
Princeton offers its students a choice of 350 courses from which to satisfy its general education requirements.
Stanford, which has a larger student body, offers even more.
Even at my small school, Swarthmore College, with only 1,350 students, we offer about 120 courses to meet our version of the general education requirement, from which students must select nine.
And though I have mentioned only extremely selective, private institutions, dont think that the range of choices they offer is peculiar to them.
Thus, at Penn State, for example, liberal arts students can choose from over 40 majors and from hundreds of courses intended to meet general education requirements.
There are many benefits to these expanded educational opportunities.
The traditional values and traditional bodies of knowledge Lets Go Shopping | 17 transmitted from teachers to students in the past were constraining and often myopic.
Until very recently, important ideas reflecting the values, insights, and challenges of people from different traditions and cultures had been systematically excluded from the curriculum.
The tastes and interests of the idiosyncratic students had been stifled and frustrated.
In the modern university, each individual student is free to pursue almost any interest, without having to be harnessed to what his intellectual ancestors thought was worth knowing.
But this freedom may come at a price.
Now students are required to make choices about education that may affect them for the rest of their lives.
And they are forced to make these choices at a point in their intellectual development when they may lack the resources to make them intelligently.
B Shopping for Entertainment EFORE THE ADVENT OF C ABLE, AMERIC AN TELEVISION VIEWERS HAD the three networks from which to choose.
In large cities, there were up to a half dozen additional local stations.
When cable first came on the scene, its primary function was to provide better reception.
Then new stations appeared, slowly at first, but more rapidly as time went on.
Now there are 200 or more (my cable provider offers 270), not counting the on-demand movies we can obtain with just a phone call.
If 200 options arent enough, there are special subscription services that allow you to watch any football game being played by a major college anywhere in the country.
And who knows what the cutting-edge technology will bring us tomorrow.
But what if, with all these choices, we find ourselves in the bind of wanting to watch two shows broadcast in the same time slot?
Thanks to VCRs, thats no longer a problem.
Watch one, and tape one for later.
Or, for the real enthusiasts among us, there are picture- 18 | The Paradox of Choice in-picture TVs that allow us to watch two shows at the same time.
And all of this is nothing compared to the major revolution in TV watching that is now at our doorstep.
Those programmable, electronic boxes like TiVo enable us, in effect, to create our own TV stations.
We can program those devices to find exactly the kinds of shows we want and to cut out the commercials, the promos, the lead-ins, and whatever else we find annoying.
And the boxes can learn what we like and then suggest to us programs that we may not have thought of.
We can now watch whatever we want whenever we want to.
We dont have to schedule our TV time.
We dont have to look at the TV page in the newspaper.
Middle of the night or early in the morningno matter when that old movie is on, its available to us exactly when we want it.
So the TV experience is now the very essence of choice without boundaries.
In a decade or so, when these boxes are in everybodys home, its a good bet that when folks gather around the watercooler to discuss last nights big TV events, no two of them will have watched the same shows.
Like the college freshmen struggling in vain to find a shared intellectual experience, American TV viewers will be struggling to find a shared TV experience.
A But Is Expanded Choice Good or Bad?
MERICANS SPEND MORE TIME SHOPPING THAN THE MEMBERS OF any other society.
Americans go to shopping centers about once a week, more often than they go to houses of worship, and Americans now have more shopping centers than high schools.
In a recent survey, 93 percent of teenage girls surveyed said that shopping was their favorite activity.
Mature women also say they like shopping, but working women say that shopping is a hassle, as do Lets Go Shopping | 19 most men.
When asked to rank the pleasure they get from various activities, grocery shopping ranks next to last, and other shopping fifth from the bottom.
And the trend over recent years is downward.
Apparently, people are shopping more now but enjoying it less.
There is something puzzling about these findings.
Its not so odd, perhaps, that people spend more time shopping than they used to.
With all the options available, picking what you want takes more effort.
But why do people enjoy it less?
And if they do enjoy it less, why do they keep doing it?
If we dont like shopping at the supermarket, for example, we can just get it over with, and buy what we always buy, ignoring the alternatives.
Shopping in the modern supermarket demands extra effort only if were intent on scrutinizing every possibility and getting the best thing.
And for those of us who shop in this way, increasing options should be a good thing, not a bad one.
And this, indeed, is the standard line among social scientists who study choice.
If were rational, they tell us, added options can only make us better off as a society.
Those of us who care will benefit, and those of us who dont care can always ignore the added options.
This view seems logically compelling; but empirically, it isnt true.
A recent series of studies, titled When Choice Is Demotivating, provide the evidence.
One study was set in a gourmet food store in an upscale community where, on weekends, the owners commonly set up sample tables of new items.
When researchers set up a display featuring a line of exotic, high-quality jams, customers who came by could taste samples, and they were given a coupon for a dollar off if they bought a jar.
In one condition of the study, 6 varieties of the jam were available for tasting.
In another, 24 varieties were available.
In either case, the entire set of 24 varieties was available for purchase.
The large array of jams attracted more people to 20 | The Paradox of Choice the table than the small array, though in both cases people tasted about the same number of jams on average.
When it came to buying, however, a huge difference became evident.
Thirty percent of the people exposed to the small array of jams actually bought a jar; only 3 percent of those exposed to the large array of jams did so.
In a second study, this time in the laboratory, college students were asked to evaluate a variety of gourmet chocolates, in the guise of a marketing survey.
The students were then asked which chocolatebased on description and appearancethey would choose for themselves.
Then they tasted and rated that chocolate.
Finally, in a different room, the students were offered a small box of the chocolates in lieu of cash as payment for their participation.
For one group of students, the initial array of chocolates numbered 6, and for the other, it numbered 30.
The key results of this study were that the students faced with the small array were more satisfied with their tasting than those faced with the large array.
In addition, they were four times as likely to choose chocolate rather than cash as compensation for their participation.
The authors of the study speculated about several explanations for these results.
A large array of options may discourage consumers because it forces an increase in the effort that goes into making a decision.
So consumers decide not to decide, and dont buy the product.
Or if they do, the effort that the decision requires detracts from the enjoyment derived from the results.
Also, a large array of options may diminish the attractiveness of what people actually choose, the reason being that thinking about the attractions of some of the unchosen options detracts from the pleasure derived from the chosen one.
I will be examining these and other possible explanations throughout the book.
But for now, the puzzle we began with remains: why cant people just ignore many or some of the options, and treat a 30-option array as if it were a 6-option array?
Lets Go Shopping | 21 There are several possible answers.
First, an industry of marketers and advertisers makes products difficult or impossible to ignore.
They are in our faces all the time.
Second, we have a tendency to look around at what others are doing and use them as a standard of comparison.
If the person sitting next to me on an airplane is using an extremely light, compact laptop computer with a large, crystal-clear screen, the choices for me as a consumer have just been expanded, whether I want them to be or not.
Third, we may suffer from what economist Fred Hirsch referred to as the tyranny of small decisions. We say to ourselves, Lets go to one more store or Lets look at one more catalog, and not Lets go to all the stores or lets look at all the catalogs. It always seems easy to add just one more item to the array that is already being considered.
So we go from 6 options to 30, one option at a time.
By the time were done with our search, we may look back in horror at all the alternatives weve considered and discarded along the way.
But what I think is most important is that people wont ignore alternatives if they dont realize that too many alternatives can create a problem.
And our culture sanctifies freedom of choice so profoundly that the benefits of infinite options seem self-evident.
When experiencing dissatisfaction or hassle on a shopping trip, consumers are likely to blame it on something elsesurly salespeople, traffic jams, high prices, items out of stockanything but the overwhelming array of options.
Nonetheless, certain indicators pop up occasionally that signal discontent with this trend.
There are now several books and magazines devoted to what is called the voluntary simplicity movement.
Its core idea is that we have too many choices, too many decisions, too little time to do what is really important.
Unfortunately, Im not sure that people attracted to this movement think about simplicity in the same way I do.
Recently I 22 | The Paradox of Choice opened a magazine called Real Simple to find something of a simplicity credo.
It said that at the end of the day, were so caught up in doing, theres no time to stop and think.
Or to take care of our own wants and needs. Real Simple, it is claimed, offers actionable solutions to simplify your life, eliminate clutter, and help you focus on what you want to do, not what you have to do. Taking care of our own wants and focusing on what we want to do does not strike me as a solution to the problem of too much choice.
It is precisely so that we can, each of us, focus on our own wants that all of these choices emerged in the first place.
Could readers be attracted to a magazine that offered to simplify their lives by convincing them to stop wanting many of the things they wanted?
That might go a long way toward reducing the choice problem.
But who would choose to buy the magazine?
We can imagine a point at which the options would be so copious that even the worlds most ardent supporters of freedom of choice would begin to say, enough already. Unfortunately, that point of revulsion seems to recede endlessly into the future.
In the next chapter, well explore some of the newer areas of choice that have been added to complicate our lives.
The question is, does this increased complexity bring with it increased satisfaction?
CHAPTER TWO New Choices  F ILTERING OUT EXTRANEOUS INFORMATION IS ONE OF THE BASIC functions of consciousness.
If everything available to our senses demanded our attention at all times, we wouldnt be able to get through the day.
Much of human progress has involved reducing the time and energy, as well as the number of processes we have to engage in and think about, for each of us to obtain the necessities of life.
We moved from foraging and subsistence agriculture to the development of crafts and trade.
As cultures advanced, not every individual had to focus every bit of energy, every day, on filling his belly.
One could specialize in a certain skill and then trade the products of that skill for other goods.
Eons later, manufacturers and merchants made life simpler still.
Individuals could simply purchase food and clothing and household items, often, until very recently, at the same general store.
The variety of offerings was meager, but the time spent procuring them was minimal as well.
In the past few decades, though, that long process of simplifying and bundling economic offerings has been reversed.
Increasingly, the trend moves back toward time-consuming foraging behavior, as each of us is forced to sift for ourselves through more and more options in almost every aspect of life.
24 | A The Paradox of Choice Choosing Utilities GENERATION AG O, ALL UTILITIES WERE REGULATED MONOPOLIES .
Consumers didnt have to make decisions about who was going to provide telephone or electric service.
Then came the breakup of Ma Bell. What followed in its wake was a set of options that has grown, over time, into a dizzying array.
We face many different possible long-distance providers, each offering many different possible plans.
We now even face choice among local telephone service providers.
And the advent of cell phones has given us the choice of cell phone service providers, multiplying options yet again.
I get about two solicitations a week from companies that want to help me make my long-distance calls, and we are all assaulted daily with broadcast and print advertising.
Phone service has become a decision to weigh and contemplate.
The same thing has begun to happen with electric power.
Companies are now competing for our business in many parts of the country.
Again, we are forced to educate ourselves so that the decisions we make will be well informed.
I am not suggesting, by the way, that deregulation and competition in the telephone and power industries are bad things.
Many experts suggest that in the case of phone service, deregulation brought improved service at lower prices.
With electric power, the jury is still out.
In some places, the introduction of choice and competition has gone smoothly.
In other places, it has been rough, with spotty service and increased prices.
And most notably in California, it has been a disaster.
But even if we assume that the kinks will be worked out eventually and competitive electric-power provision will benefit consumers, the fact remains that its another choice we have to make.
New Choices | 25 In discussing the introduction of electric power competition in New York, Edward A. Smeloff, a utility industry expert, said, In the past we trusted that state regulators who were appointed by our elected officials were watching out for us, which may or may not have been true.
The new model is, Figure it out for yourself.  Is this good news or not?
According to a survey conducted by Yankelovich Partners, a majority of people want more control over the details of their lives, but a majority of people also want to simplify their lives.
There you have itthe paradox of our times.
As evidence of this conflicted desire, it turns out that many people, though happy about the availability of telephone choices or electric choices, dont really make them.
They stick with what they already have without even investigating alternatives.
Almost twenty years after phone deregulation, AT&T still has 60 percent of the market, and half of its customers pay the basic rates.
Most folks dont even shop around for calling plans within the company.
And in Philadelphia, with the recent arrival of electricity competition, only an estimated 15 percent of customers shopped for better deals.
You might think that theres no harm in this, that customers are just making a sensible choice not to worry.
But the problem is that state regulators arent there anymore to make sure consumers dont get ripped off.
In an era of deregulation, even if you keep what youve always had, you may end up paying substantially more for the same service.
H Choosing Health Insurance EALTH INSURANCE IS SERIOUS B USINESS , AND THE CHOICES WE MAKE with respect to it can have devastating consequences.
Not too long ago, only one kind of health insurance was available to most people, usually some local version of Blue Cross or a nonprofit health 26 | The Paradox of Choice care provider like Kaiser Permanente.
And these companies didnt offer a wide variety of plans to their subscribers.
Nowadays, organizations present their employees with optionsone or more HMOs or PPOs.
And within these plans, there are more optionsthe level of deductible, the prescription drug plan, dental plan, vision plan, and so on.
If consumers are buying their own insurance rather than choosing from what employers provide, even more options are available.
Once again, I dont mean to suggest that we cant or dont benefit from these options.
Perhaps many of us do.
But it presents yet another thing to worry about, to master, or, perhaps, to get very wrong.
In the presidential election of 2000, one of the points of contention between George W. Bush and Al Gore concerned the matter of choice in health insurance.
Both candidates supported providing prescription drug coverage for senior citizens, but they differed dramatically in their views about how best to do that.
