Comparison shopping to get the best price adds still another dimension to the array of choices, so that if you were a truly careful shopper, you could spend the better part of a day just to select a box of crackers, as you worried about price, flavor, freshness, fat, sodium, and calories.
Opening just one of them, a summer catalog for women, we find  19 different styles of womens T-shirts, each available in 8 different colors,  10 different styles of shorts, each available in 8 colors,  8 different styles of chinos, available in 6 to 8 colors,  7 different styles of jeans, each available in 5 colors,  dozens of different styles of blouses and pants, each available in multiple colors,  9 different styles of thongs, each available in 5 or 6 colors.
If the person sitting next to me on an airplane is using an extremely light, compact laptop computer with a large, crystal-clear screen, the choices for me as a consumer have just been expanded, whether I want them to be or not.
Taking care of our own wants and focusing on what we want to do does not strike me as a solution to the problem of too much choice.
We can imagine a point at which the options would be so copious that even the worlds most ardent supporters of freedom of choice would begin to say, enough already.
Much of human progress has involved reducing the time and energy, as well as the number of processes we have to engage in and think about, for each of us to obtain the necessities of life.
New Choices | 25 In discussing the introduction of electric power competition in New York, Edward A. Smeloff, a utility industry expert, said, In the past we trusted that state regulators who were appointed by our elected officials were watching out for us, which may or may not have been true.
According to a survey conducted by Yankelovich Partners, a majority of people want more control over the details of their lives, but a majority of people also want to simplify their lives.
In the presidential election of 2000, one of the points of contention between George W. Bush and Al Gore concerned the matter of choice in health insurance.
And not only is the health insurance issue incredibly complicated (I think Ive met only one person in my entire life who fully understands what his insurance covers and what it doesnt New Choices | 27 and what those statements that come from the insurance company really mean), but the stakes are astronomical.
The tenor of medical practice has shifted from one in which the all-knowing, paternalistic doctor tells the patient what must be doneor just does itto one in which the doctor arrays the possibilities before the patient, along with the likely plusses and minuses of each, and the patient makes a choice.
And the burden falls primarily on women, who are typically the guardians not only of their own health, but that of their husbands and children.
It is an overwhelming task for women, and consumers in general, to be able to sort through the information they find and make decisions, says Amy Allina, program director of the National Womens Health Network.
And what makes it overwhelming is not only that the decision is ours, but that the number of sources of information from which we are to make the decisions has exploded.
The combination of decision autonomy and a proliferation of treatment possibilities places an incredible burden on every person in a high-stakes area of decision making that did not exist twenty years ago.
The latest indication of the shift in responsibility for medical decisions from doctor to patient is the widespread advertising of prescription drugs that exploded onto the scene after various federal restrictions on such ads were lifted in 1997.
However, the question of timing led to another series of choices involving ticking biological clocks, the demands of finishing 38 | The Paradox of Choice PhDs, and uncertainty about future employment circumstances.
Though unorthodox romantic choices are still greeted with opprobrium or much worse in many parts of the world and in some parts of the United States, it seems clear that the general trend is toward ever greater tolerance of romantic diversity.
Wolfe conducted in-depth interviews with a wide variety of people scattered throughout the U.S., and what he found was near unanimity that it was up to each person, as an individual, to pick her or his own values and make her or his own moral choices.
They can pick and choose from among the practices and teachings those that seem to suit them best, including, paradoxically, the choice of conservative denominations that are attractive in part because they limit the choices people face in other parts of their lives.
As multiracial marriages become more common, the offspring of those marriages display a variety of hues and physical features that make racial 42 | The Paradox of Choice identification from the outside more difficult.
The young New York immigrant woman from Mexico sitting in a college class in contemporary literature can ask herself, as class discussion of a novel begins, whether shes going to express her identity as the Latina, the Mexican, the woman, the immigrant, or the teenager as class discussion unfolds.
But as with marriage, choice of identity has been moving from a state in which the default option was extremely powerful and the fact of choice had little psychological reality to a state in which choice is very real and salient.
As with all the issues Ive been discussing in this chapter, this change in the status of personal identity is both good and bad news: good news because it liberates us, and bad news because it burdens us with the responsibility of choice.
The transformation of choice in modern life is that choice in many facets of life has gone from implicit and often psychologically unreal to explicit and psychologically very real.
We probably would be deeply resentful if someone tried to take our freedom of choice away in any part of life that we really cared 44 | The Paradox of Choice about and really knew something about.
In the pages that follow, we will begin to look at some of the ways we can ease that burden and, thereby, lessen the stress and dissatisfaction that comes with it.
For example, after renting an apartment you might discover that easy access to shopping and public transportation turned out to be 48 | The Paradox of Choice more important, and spaciousness less important, than you thought when you signed the lease.
As the number of options increases, the effort required to make a good decision escalates as well, which is one of the reasons that choice can be transformed from a blessing into a burden.
The way that the meal or the music or the movie makes you feel in the momenteither good or badcould be called experienced utility.
This peak-end rule of Kahnemans is what we use to summarize the experience, and then we rely on that summary later to remind ourselves of how the experience felt.
The summaries in turn influence our decisions about whether to have that experience again, and factors such as the proportion of pleasure to displeasure during the course of the experience or how long the experience lasted, have almost no influence on our memory of it.
In a world of expanding, confusing, and conflicting options, we can see that this difficulty in targeting our goals accuratelystep one on the path to a wise decisionsets us up for disappointment with the choices we actually make.
But we need to know that the information is reliable, and we need to have enough time to get through all the information thats available.
On top of that, the advent of cable TV and its many channels has brought with it the infomercial, a show that is an ad masquerading as entertainment.
The avalanche of electronic information we now face is such that in order to solve the problem of choosing from among 200 brands of cereal or 5,000 mutual funds, we must first solve the problem of choosing from 10,000 web sites offering to make us informed consumers.
E Evaluating the Information VEN IF WE C AN ACCURATELY DETERMINE WHAT WE WANT AND THEN find good information, in a quantity we can handle, do we really know how to analyze, sift, weigh, and evaluate it to arrive at the right conclusions and make the right choices?
The availability heuristic says that we assume that the more available some piece of information is to memory, the more frequently we must have encountered it in the past.
So its the salience of starting letters that makes t-words come easily to mind, while people mistakenly think its the frequency of starting letters that makes them come easily to mind.
In one study, researchers asked respondents to estimate the number of deaths per year that occur as a result of various diseases, car accidents, natural disasters, electrocutions, and homicidesforty different types of misfortune in all.
The authors of the study 60 | The Paradox of Choice looked at two newspapers, published on opposite sides of the U.S., and they counted the number of stories involving various causes of death.
What they found was that the frequency of newspaper coverage and the respondents estimates of the frequency of death were almost perfectly correlated.
People mistook the pervasiveness of newspaper stories about homicides, accidents, or firesvivid, salient, and easily available to memoryas a sign of the frequency of the events these stories profiled.
As the number of choices we face continues to escalate and the amount of information we need escalates with it, we may find ourselves increasingly relying on secondhand information rather than on personal experience.
National news sources such as CNN or USA Today tell everyone in the country, and now even the world, the same story, which makes it less likely that an individuals biased understanding of the evidence will be corrected by his friends and neighbors.
A more finely tuned example of the importance of the context of comparison comes from a study of supermarket shoppers done in the 1970s, shortly after unit-pricing started appearing on the shelves just beneath the various items.
In this case, what the shopper gets to see, side by side, is the small, large, and family sizes of the same item along with their respective unit prices.
The effects of framing become even more powerful when the stakes are higher: Imagine that you are a physician working in an Asian village, and six hundred people have come down with a lifethreatening disease.
Just as in the matter of discounts and surcharges, it is the framing of the choice that affects our perception of it, and in turn affects what we choose.
From the perspective of the bottom line, they appear the same; both involve a choice between seeing a concert and being $40 poorer or not seeing it and being $20 poorer.
It could be part of a ways to spend a Friday night account, in which case it would join entries like hanging out at a bar, going to a basketball game, or staying home and dozing in front of the television.
As the magnitude of the gain increases, the amount of additional satisfaction people get out of each additional unit decreases.
The fact that the payoff for the risky choice is double the payoff for the sure thing exactly compensates for the fact that the chances youll get the payoff are halved.
The two gifts are of roughly equal value and randomly distributedhalf of the people in the room get one, while the other half get the other.
With many decisions, the consequences of error may be trivial a small price to pay for the wealth of choices available to us.
When you put a lot of time and effort into choosing a restaurant or a place to go on vacation or a new item of clothing, you want that effort to be rewarded with a satisfying result.
And the first choice you must make is between the goal of choosing the absolute best and the goal of choosing something that is good enough.
I believe that the goal of maximizing is a source of great dissatis- When Only the Best Will Do | 79 faction, that it can make people miserableespecially in a world that insists on providing an overwhelming number of choices, both trivial and not so trivial.
When Nobel Prizewinning economist and psychologist Herbert Simon initially introduced the idea of satisficing in the 1950s, he suggested that when all the costs (in time, money, and anguish) involved in getting information about all the options are factored in, satisficing is, in fact, the maximizing strategy.
The perceptiveness of Simons observation is at the heart of many of the strategies I will offer for fighting back against the tyranny of overwhelming choices.
And when the questioning was broadened to include other experiences, we found something much more compelling 84 | The Paradox of Choice EXAMPLE OF A MAXIMIZER  The New Yorker Collection 2000 Leo Cullum from cartoonbank.com.
We tested this idea by having the same people who filled out the Maximization Scale fill out a variety of other questionnaires that have been shown over the years to be reliable indicators of well-being.
Nonetheless, I believe that being a maximizer does play a causal role in peoples unhappiness, and I believe that learning how to satisfice is an important step not only in coping with a world of choice but in simply enjoying life.
And its easy to see that if you experience regret on a regular basis, it will rob you of at least some of the satisfaction that your good decisions warrant.
We have given some of the respondents who filled out our Maximization Scale a scale to measure perfectionism, and we have found that, while responses on the two scales are correlated, maximizing and perfectionism are not interchangeable.
Perfectionists may not be as happy with the results of their actions as they should be, but they seem to be happier with the results of their actions than maximizers are with the results of theirs.
When I go into one of those fancy stores that sells elegantly prepared takeout foods or to a social gathering that offers a buffet that looks like it was prepared for Gourmet magazine, I look at the wide variety of delicious foods, and I want them all.
The task, then, for someone who feels overwhelmed by choices, is to apply the satisficing strategy more often, letting go of the expectation that the best is attainable.
In fact, the more options there are, the more likely When Only the Best Will Do | 93 it is that the satisficer will find one that meets his or her standards.
They might be aware that they have trouble making decisions and that they fear they will regret decisions and that they often derive little lasting satisfaction from the decisions they have made, but all with no conscious awareness of what is at the root of the problem.
Throughout this chapter, I have been talking about maximizing and the number of options people face as if the two were indepen- 96 | The Paradox of Choice dent of each other.
If the speculation is correct, we ought to find that in cultures in which choice is less ubiquitous and extensive than it is in the U.S., there should be fewer maximizers.
The food we eat, the cars we drive, the houses we live in, the music we listen to, the books we read, the hobbies we pursue, the charities we contribute to, the demonstrations we attendeach of these choices has an expressive function, regardless of its practical importance.
So it is not an exaggeration to say that our most fundamental sense of well-being crucially depends on our having the ability to exert control over our environment and recognizing that we do.
Quite apart from the instrumental benefits of choicethat it enables people to get what they wantand the expressive benefits of choicethat it enables people to say who they arechoice enables people to be actively and effectively engaged in the world, with profound psychological benefits.
104 | The Paradox of Choice The first is that, as the experience of choice and control gets broader and deeper, expectations about choice and control may rise to match that experience.
Like the mechanical rabbit at the dog-racing track that speeds along just ahead of the dogs no matter how fast they run, aspirations and expectations about control speed ahead of their realization, no matter how liberating the realization becomes.
The choice of when to be a chooser may be the most important choice we have to make.
Typically, studies of happiness take the form of questionnaires, and measures of happinessor subjective well-being, as it is often calledare derived from answers to lists of questions.
In the context of this discussion of choice and autonomy, it is also important to note that, in many ways, social ties actually decrease freedom, choice, and autonomy.
As Myers graphically puts it, since 1960 in the U.S., the divorce rate has doubled, the teen suicide rate has tripled, the recorded violent crime rate has quadrupled, the prison population has quintupled, the percentage of babies born to unmarried parents has sextupled, and the rate of cohabitation without marriage (which actually is a pretty good predictor of eventual divorce) has increased sevenfold.
And as Lane points out, the rate of serious clinical depression has more than tripled over the last two generations, and increased by perhaps a factor of ten from 1900 to 2000.
All of which contributes to, and is exacerbated by, a massive increase in levels of stress, stress that in turn contributes to hypertension and heart disease, lowers immune responsiveness, and causes anxiety and dissatisfaction.
Put these two pieces of information together, and it might lead you to expect that depression is going the way of polio, with 110 | The Paradox of Choice autonomy and choice as the psychological vaccines.
One of the principal virtues of free-market choice is that it gives people the opportunity to express their displeasure by exit.
Most people find it extremely challenging to balance the conflicting impulses of freedom of choice on the one hand and loyalty and commitment on the other.
With clearer rules of the game for us to live byconstraints that specify how much of life each of us should devote to ourselves and what our obligations to family, friends, and community should bemuch of the onus for making these decisions would be lifted.
Having the discipline to live by the rules you make for yourself is, of course, another matter, but one things for sure: following rules eliminates troublesome choices in your daily life, each time you get into a car or each time you go to a cocktail party.
So by using rules, presumptions, standards, and routines to constrain ourselves and limit the decisions we face, we can make life more manageable, which gives us more time to devote ourselves to other people and to the decisions that we cant or dont want to avoid.
At the turn of the twentieth century, biologist Jacob von Uexkull, observing how evolution shaped organisms so that their Choice and Happiness | 115 perceptual and behavioral abilities were precisely attuned to their survival, remarked that security is more important than wealth.
In other words, a squirrel in the wild doesnt have the wealth of experience and of choice that people do when they decide to take a walk in the forest.
What the squirrel does have is the security that it will notice what matters most and know how to do what it needs to do to survive, because biology supplies the needed constraints on choice.
PA RT OF THE DOWNSIDE of abundant choice is that each new option adds to the list of trade-offs, and trade-offs have psychological consequences.
The necessity of making trade-offs alters how we feel about the decisions we face; more important, it affects the level of satisfaction we experience from the decisions we ultimately make.
As I write this, real estate certainly seems a better choice than stocks, but in 1996, with the market about to soar, $50,000 in the right tech stocks, with the right exit strategy, might have made a fortune.
The point is, even decisions that appear to be no-brainers carry the hidden costs of the options declined.
If we assume that opportunity costs take away from the overall desirability of the most-preferred option and that we will feel the opportunity costs associated with many of the options we reject, then the more alternatives there are from which to choose, the greater our experience of the opportunity costs will be.
The existence of multiple alternatives makes it easy for us to imagine alternatives that dont existalternatives that combine Missed Opportunities A COUPLE DISCOVERS COSTS OF THE H AV I N G | 123 OPPORTUNITY CHILDREN  The New Yorker Collection 2000 David Sipress from cartoonbank.com.
Ultimately, the quality of choices that matters to people is the subjective experience that the choices afford.
They were presented with a choice between Car A, safety rating 8 and price of $25,000, and Car B, safety rating 6, and the price that they had previously said made the two cars equally attractive.
This choice was clearly different from the way people reacted to the task in which they had to establish a price that would make the two cars equivalent.
Rather, when the time came to make the choice, they were simply unwilling to live by the price on safety that they had already established.
Perhaps seeing the inferior Aiwa bolsters peoples confidence that the Sony is really a good deal, though in a market with dozens of brands and models of CD players available, the presence of this second alternative doesnt really prove much.
It is 128 | The Paradox of Choice hard to imagine why adding the pair of cheaper pens to the mix should do anything to alter the value of the good pen in comparison with $1.50.
With the judgment framed in this negative language, the percentage of those voting for the child to go to B dropped from 64 percent to 55 percent.
In almost every case, respondents placed a higher value on the magazine or the video when they were evaluating it in isolation than when they were evaluating it as part of a cluster.
And because the losses will loom larger than the gains, the net result of the comparison will be negative.
And we dont want to do it because it is emotionally unpleasant to go through the process of thinking about opportunity costs and the losses they imply.
Opportunity Costs, Trade-offs, and Exploding Options W EVE SEEN THAT AS THE NUMBER OF OPTIONS UNDER CONSIDERA - tion goes up and the attractive features associated with the rejected alternatives accumulate, the satisfaction derived from the chosen alternative will go down.
The trick is to limit the set of possibilities so that the opportunity costs dont add up to make all the alternatives unattractive.
Appreciating the cumulative burden posed by opportunity costs can help us better understand the findings of the study mentioned in Chapter 1 in which two sets of participants encountered a variety of different flavors of a brand of high-quality jam at a sample table set up in a gourmet food store.
But the potential attractiveness of each will subtract from the attractiveness of all of the others.
Pretesting with other students had determined that most people preferred the van Gogh and the Monet to the kitschy posters of cartoons and animals.
In a final example, college couples were recruited to participate in a study of the effects of romantic relationships on the college experience.
My concern, given the research on trade-offs and opportunity costs, is that as the number of options goes up, the need to provide justifications for decisions also increases.
While students at many colleges are happy to discover a subject to study that not only do they enjoy but that will enable them to make a living, many of the students I teach have multiple interests and capabilities.
With fewer options and more constraints, many trade-offs would be eliminated, and there would be less self-doubt, less of an effort to justify decisions, more satisfaction, and less second-guessing of the decisions once made.
142 | The Paradox of Choice The anguish and inertia caused by having too many choices was described in the book Quarterlife Crisis: The Unique Challenges of Life in Your Twenties.
After millions of years of survival based on simple distinctions, it may simply be that we are Missed Opportunities | 143 biologically unprepared for the number of choices we face in the modern world.
Finally making the choice somehow minimizes the pleasure in the thing that is gained, though there also seems to be an accompanying relief in finally making the choice.
As we see reversible marriages come apart, we may think to ourselves, how fortunate the couple was to have a flexible attitude toward marital 146 | The Paradox of Choice commitment, given that it didnt work out.
Indeed, I believe that one of the reasons that maximizers are less happy, less satisfied with their lives, and more depressed than satisficers is precisely because the taint of trade-offs and opportunity costs washes out much that should be satisfying about the decisions they make.
The bitter taste of regret detracts from the satisfaction we get, whether or not the 148 | The Paradox of Choice regret is justified.
And once again, the more options you have, the more likely it is that you will experience regret, either in anticipation of decisions or after them.
When confronted with a choice between a job that offers the possibility of rapid advancement and a job that offers congenial workmates, I can easily imagine finding a job that has both.
Without the ability to imagine a world that is different from our actual world and then to act to bring this imagined world into being, we never would have survived as a species, much less advanced through the millions of stages of speculation and trial and error that is the history of human progress.
The fact that counterfactual thinking seems to hone in on the controllable aspects of a situation only increases the chances that a 154 | The Paradox of Choice person will experience regret when engaging in counterfactual thinking.
Opportunity costs capture the benefits that would have come as a result of a different choice, and as soon as you return from that seaside vacation, the counterfactual thinking may begin.
156 | The Paradox of Choice And as we saw in the last chapter, if the number of candidates from which the choice is made goes up, each having some attractive feature that the chosen candidate does not, the opportunity costs (and the counterfactual thoughts and the smidgens of regret) mount higher and higher.
So if, by engaging in the careful decision-making process and trade-off assessment I discussed in the last chapter, you bring to mind all the wonderful things a seaside vacation might have included but didnt, there will be no shortage of negatives to occupy your mind, even if the vacation was good.
What Regret Makes Us Do U N L I K E O T H E R N E G AT I V E E M O T I O N S  A N G E R , S A D N E S S , D I S A P - pointment, even griefwhat is so difficult about regret is the feeling that the regrettable state of affairs could have been avoided and that it could have been avoided by you, if only you had chosen differently.
When it comes to taking vacations, nothing compares to the smell of the ocean and the sound of the surf.
If youre trying to decide whether to buy a Toyota Camry or a Honda Accord and your closest friend just bought an Accord, youre likely to buy one too, partly because the only way to avoid the information that you made a mis- If Only .
Once we join the distant club, all the reasons for not 160 | The Paradox of Choice joining go out the window and we are left regretting our initial failure to act.
: The Problem of Regret | 161 the ticket holders should be asking themselves on the night of the performance is, Will I get more satisfaction out of a night at the theater or out of a night spent reading and listening to music at home?
What leads me to believe that sunk-cost effects are motivated by the desire to avoid regret rather than just the desire to avoid a loss is that sunk-cost effects are much bigger when a person bears responsibility for the initial decision (to buy the ski tickets or the expensive shoes).
Many people persist in very troubled relationships not because of love or what they owe the other person or because they feel a moral obligation to honor vows, but because of all the time and effort theyve already put in.
And as the number of options continues to proliferate, making an exhaustive investigation of the possibilities impossible, concern that there may be a better option out there may induce you to anticipate the regret you will feel later on, when that option is discovered, and thus prevent you from making a decision at all.
When considering a decision involving complex possibilities, the fact that there is no one option that is best in all respects will induce people to consider the opportunity costs associated with choosing the best option.
Though it may be annoying to go into a bank and discover that only a single tellers window is open and the line is long, there wont be anything to regret.
Ironically, then, the greater the number of appealing choices, the greater the opportunity for regret.
Perfection is the only weapon against regret, and endless, exhaustive, paralyzing consideration of the alternatives is the only way to achieve perfection.
First, antici- pating that we may regret a decision may induce us to take the decision seriously and to imagine the various scenarios that may follow it.
Second, regret may emphasize the mistakes we made in arriving at a decision, so that, should a similar situation arise in the future, we wont make the same mistakes.
: The Problem of Regret | 165 sign to those others that we feel their pain may induce them to stick with us and trust us in the future.
If you decide to take a job 2,500 miles away from your family, it is appropriate to regret having been put in the position of trading off a good job opportunity against family ties, even if the decision works out well.
And to acknowledge the fact of tragic choices is merely to give the sacrifices entailed in a choice their due.
Still, for people who are so plagued by regret that they cant let go of decisions in the past and have enormous difficulty making decisions in the present, taking steps to reduce regret could be extremely beneficial to their well-being.
In Chapter 11, we will discuss a general approach to coping with a world of choice, and many of these methods have the direct effect of diminishing our tendency to regret.
CHAPTER EIGHT Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation  W HILE REGRET AND OPPORTUNITY COSTS C AN FOCUS OUR ATTEN- tion on what weve passed up, there is also plenty of room for dissatisfaction with the options that we actually choose.
An experience that boosts our hedonic or pleasure temperature by say 20 degrees at the first encounter may Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 169 boost it by only 15 degrees the next time, by 10 degrees the time after that, and eventually it may stop boosting it at all.
Even though we dont expect it to happen, such adaptation to pleasure is inevitable, and it may cause more disappointment in a world of many choices than in a world of few.
But as time passes, and the winners and the accident victims get used to their new circumstances, the hedonic thermometers in both groups begin to converge, becoming much more like the population at large.
Second, the new standard of whats a good experience (winning the lottery) may make many of the ordinary pleasures of daily life (the smell of freshly brewed coffee, the new blooms and refreshing breezes of a lovely spring day) rather tame by comparison.
The immediate aftermath of the accident is crushing, because these accident victims have lived their lives as mobile individuals and they possess none of the skills that enable paraplegics to negotiate in the environment.
Twenty-five years ago, economist Tibor Scitovsky explored some of the consequences of the phenomenon of adaptation in his book The Joyless Economy.
The result of having pleasure turn into comfort is disappointment, and the disappointment will be especially severe when the goods we are consuming are durable goods, such as cars, houses, stereo systems, elegant clothes, jewelry, and computers.
And because Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 173 of adaptation, no matter how good your choices and how pleasurable the results, you still end up back where you started in terms of subjective experience.
The participants in the study were somewhat mindful of adaptation effects, and, accordingly, they expected to be extremely happy (or sad) when the decision was made, but that this joy or sadness would dissipate somewhat over time.
Elderly patients suffering from 176 | The Paradox of Choice a variety of the most common debilitating illnesses of advanced age reliably judge the quality of their lives more positively than do the physicians who are treating them.
T Adaptation and the Choice Problem HE AB UNDANCE OF CHOICE AVAILABLE TO US EXACERB ATES THE problem of adaptation by increasing the costs, in time and effort, of making a decision.
Time, effort, opportunity costs, anticipated Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 177 regret, and the like are fixed costs that we pay up front in making a decision, and those costs then get amortized over the life of the decision.
So the more choices we have, the more effort goes into our decisions, and the more we expect to enjoy the benefits of those decisions.
If adaptation saddles people with a subjective experience of their choices that doesnt justify the effort that went into making those choices, people will begin to see choice not as a liberator but as a burden.
We could go a long way toward improving the experienced wellbeing of people in our society if we could find a way to stop the process of adaptation.
But adaptation is so fundamental and universal a feature of our responses to events in the worldit is so much a hardwired property of our nervous systemsthat there is very little we can do to mitigate it directly.
Factoring in adaptation to the decision-making process may make differences that seem large at the moment of Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 179 choice feel much smaller.
Factoring in adaptation may help us be satisfied with choices that are good enough rather than the best, and this in turn will reduce the time and effort we devote to making those choices.
Nonetheless, we describe restaurants to our friends as bad, and they understand us to mean that compared to some standard, this restaurant is on the wrong side of zero.
The Paradox of Choice Hopes, Expectations, Past Experience, and the Experience of Others HEN PEOPLE EVALUATE AN EXPERIENCE, THEY ARE PERFORMING one or more of the following comparisons: Comparing the experience to what they hoped it would be 2.
Comparing the experience to experiences that others have had Each of these comparisons makes the evaluation of an experience relative, and this may diminish the experience or enhance it.
The same meal, in the same restaurant, can be Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 183 judged negatively on the basis of the first set of comparisons and positively on the basis of the second.
Social scientist Alex Michalos, in his discussion of the perceived quality of experience, argued that people establish standards of satisfaction based on the assessment of three gaps: the gap between what one has and wants, the gap between what one has and thinks others like oneself have, and the gap between what one has and the best one has had in the past.
Michalos found that much of the individual variation in life satisfaction could be explained in terms not of differences in objective experience, but in terms of differences in these three perceived gaps.
If your hedonic assessment derives from the relation between the objective quality of an experience and your expectations, then the rising quality of experience is met with rising expectations, and youre just running in place.
The hedonic treadmill and the satisfaction treadmill that I discussed in the last chapter explain to a significant degree how real income can increase by a factor of two (in the U.S.) or five (in Japan) without having a measurable effect on the subjective well-being of the members of society.
In Chapter 3, I emphasized how language can affect the framing of an experience and thus, the setting of the zero point.
I The Curse of High Expectations N THE FALL OF 1999, THE NEW YORK TIMES AND CBS NEWS ASKED teenagers to compare their experience with what their parents had experienced growing up.
Whereas teens from lowincome households talked about how much easier it was to get schoolwork done thanks to computers and the Internet, teens from high-income homes talked about how much had to be sifted through because of computers and the Internet.
One part of life where the curse of high expectations is apparent 186 | The Paradox of Choice is health and health care.
No matter how frustrating it is for people to get prompt and decent health care in the age of managed care, there is no question that the state of American health is better than its ever been.
What contributes to high expectations, above and beyond the quality of past experience, is, I think, the amount of choice and control we now have over most aspects of our lives.
Because of this, and because of the role played by expectations in hedonic evaluations, an experience that is on the positive side of the hedonic thermometer for a satisficer may be on the negative side for a maximizer.
When you compare yourself with others who are worse off, you may take pleasure in your superiority, but you may also experience guilt, embarrassment, the need to cope with other peoples envy or resentment, and the fear that their fate could happen to you.
So instead of comparing ourselves to everyone, we try to mark off the world in such a way that in our pond, in comparison with our reference group, we are successful.
The way to be happythe way to succeed in the quest for statusis to find the right pond and stay in it.
They were asked to choose between an IQ of 110 when the IQ of others is 90 and an IQ of 130 when the IQ of others is 150.
NONETHELESS , I BELIEVE that the problem is more acute now than in the past, and once again it comes back to having a plethora of choices.
This essentially universal and unrealistically high standard of comparison decreases the satisfaction of those of us who are in the middle or below, even as the actual circumstances of our lives improve.
Our social and economic system, which is based in part on an unequal distribution of scarce and highly desirable commodities, inherently propels people into lives of per- 192 | The Paradox of Choice  The New Yorker Collection 2001 Barbara Smaller from cartoonbank.com.
As I mentioned in Chapter 4, economist Fred Hirsch argued in his book Social Limits to Growth that while technological development may continue to increase the number of people who can be fed from an acre of farmland or the number of children who can be Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 193 inoculated against polio for $1,000, there are certain kinds of goods that no amount of technological development will make universally available.
Psychologist Sonja Lyubomirsky and her colleagues have done a series of studies that looked for differences among individuals in their responses to social comparison information, and what they have found is that this kind of data has relatively little impact on happy people.
198 | Y The Paradox of Choice Maximizing, Satisficing, and Social Comparison OUR LEVEL OF HAPPINESS IS NOT THE ONLY FACT OR THAT COLORS your response to social comparison.
In the research I discussed in Chapter 4, we took participants who had filled out our Maximization Scale, and put them in a situation like the one I just described, in which they had to unscramble anagrams alongside another person who was doing the task faster or slower than they were.
While, in theory, the best is an ideal that exists independent of what other people have, in practice, determining the best is so difficult that people fall back on comparisons with others.
W Choice Options and Social Comparison E HAVE ALREADY SEEN HOW THE MORE OPTIONS WE HAVE, THE more difficulty we have gathering the information necessary to make a good decision.
The more difficult information gathering 200 | The Paradox of Choice is, the more likely it is that you will rely on the decisions of others.
But the more social comparison you do, the more likely you are to be affected by it, and the direction of such effects tends to be negative.
So by forcing us to look around at what others are doing before we make decisions, the world of bountiful options is encouraging a process that will often, if not always, leave us feeling worse about our decisions than we would if we hadnt engaged in the process to begin with.
While the American gross domestic product, a primary measure of prosperity, more than doubled in the last thirty years, the proportion of the population describing itself as very happy declined.
The most dramatic manifestation of this decrease in societal happiness is in the prevalence of clinical depression, at the opposite end of the happiness continuum.
The symptoms of depression include  Loss of interest or pleasure in routine daily activities, including work and family  Loss of energy, fatigue  Feelings of worthlessness, guilt, and self-blame  Indecisiveness  Inability to concentrate or think clearly  Recurrent thoughts of death, including thoughts of suicide  Insomnia  Loss of interest in sex  Loss of interest in food  Sadness: feelings of helplessness, hopelessness  Low self-esteem Aside from the obvious fact that victims of depression are miserably unhappy, depression also takes a major toll on society in general.
Seligman speculated that at least some instances of clinical depression were the result of individuals having experienced one significant loss of control over their lives and then coming to believe that they were helpless, that they could expect this helplessness to persist into the future and to be present across a wide range of different circumstances.
These figures were not visible to the infants, but if the infants turned their heads on the pillows, a small light would go on behind the umbrella, making the dancing figures visible for a little while.
Whenever a control infant turned on the light behind the umbrella in its crib, that action also turned on the light behind the umbrella in the crib of another infant.
The different reactions of the two groups caused researchers to conclude that it is not dancing toy animals that are an endless source of delight for infants, but rather having control.
The world is just a set of things that happen to them, leaving them completely at the mercy of others.
The significance of control to well-being was also dramatically demonstrated by a study of people at the opposite end of the life cycle.
The first group was also given several mundane choices to make every day and a plant to take care of in their rooms, while members of the second group had no such choices and had their plants cared for by the staff.
The nursing home residents given a small measure of control over their daily lives were more active and alert, and reported a greater sense of well-being than the residents without such control.
If your rsum is unimpressive and you choke at interviews, if youre a passive kind of person, and if you believe that the last job was really available for the right person (not you), then your expectations for the future are pretty bleak.
The revised theory of helplessness and depression argued that helplessness induced by failure or lack of control leads to depression if a persons causal explanations for that failure are global, chronic, and personal.
In a study comparing rates in 1990 to rates in the 1970s and 1980s, UNICEF found that the incidence of suicide tripled in France, more than doubled in Norway, doubled in Australia, and increased by 50 percent or more in Canada, England, 210 | The Paradox of Choice and the U.S. Only in Japan and what was then West Germany did youth suicide go down.
In the last chapter we saw that the amount of pleasure and satisfaction we derive from experience has as much to do with how the experience relates to expectations as it does with the qualities of the experience itself.
A Rising Individualism and Self-Blame LONG WITH THE PERVASIVE RISE IN EXPECTATIONS , AMERIC AN CUL- ture has also become more individualistic than it was, perhaps as a by-product of the desire to have control over every aspect of life.
To be less individualisticto tie oneself tightly into networks of family, friends, and communityis to be bound, to some degree, by the needs of family, friends, and community.
I think the single most difficult negotiation that faces young people who marry in todays America is the one in which the partners decide where their individual autonomy ends and marital obligation and responsibility take over.
As a corollary, the modern emphasis on individual autonomy and control may be neutralizing a crucial vaccine against depression: deep commitment and belonging to social groups and institutionsfamilies, civic associations, faith communities, and the like.
And in this context it is relevant that the incidence of depression among the Amish of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, is less than 20 percent of the national rate.
For the Amish, the unease that the rest of us may feel at the prospect of significant communal obligation is largely absent.
Media and peer pressure tells us that obesity is a matter of choice, personal control, and personal responsibility, that we should aspire to look perfect, and that if we dont, we have only ourselves to blame.
The illusion that each person can have the body that he or she wants is especially painful for women, and especially in societies, like ours, in which the ideal body is extremely thin.
Even more significant for the present discussion is that in cultures that adopt the ultrathin ideal, the rate of depression in women is twice that in men.
The (admittedly speculative) connection between thinness and depression is this: body weight is something people are supposed to 214 | The Paradox of Choice control, and to look perfect is to be thin.
Maximizers will put the most work into their decisions and have the highest expectations about the results of those decisions, and thus will be the most disappointed.
Choice, Disappointment, and Depression | 215 you make fails to live up to expectations and aspirations, and if you consistently take personal responsibility for the disappointments, then the trivial looms larger and larger, and the conclusion that you cant do anything right becomes devastating.
The Psychology of Autonomy and the Ecology of Autonomy P ARADOXIC ALLY, EVEN AT A TIME AND PLACE WHEN EXCESSIVE expectations of and aspirations for control are contributing to an epidemic of depression, those who feel that they have control are in better psychological shape than those who dont.
To understand this, we need to make a distinction between what is good for the individual and what is good for the society as a whole, between the psychology of personal autonomy and the ecology of personal autonomy.
The combination of hedonic lag with the mixture of psycho- A CONSEQUENCE OF TOO MUCH FREEDOM  The New Yorker Collection 1999 Benita Epstein from cartoonbank.com.
Rather it is the result of a complex interaction among many psychological processes that permeate our culture, including rising expectations, awareness of opportunity costs, aversion to trade-offs, adaptation, regret, self-blame, the tendency to engage in social comparisons, and maximizing.
In the next chapter, we will review and amplify the recommendations weve made throughout the book, exploring what individuals can do, despite societal pressure, to overcome the overload of choice.
The success of modernity turns out to be bittersweet, and everywhere we look it appears that a significant contributing factor is the overabundance of choice.
Choose When to Choose S WE HAVE SEEN, HAVING THE OPPORTUNITY TO CHOOSE IS ESSEN - tial for well-being, but choice has negative features, and the negative features escalate as the number of choices increases.
If the ability to choose enables you to get a better car, house, job, vacation, or coffeemaker, but the process of choice makes you feel worse about what youve chosen, you really havent gained anything from the opportunity to choose.
This exercise may help you better appreciate the costs associated with the decisions you make, which may lead you to give up some decisions altogether or at least to establish rules of thumb for yourself about how many options to consider, or how much time and energy to invest in choosing.
But if youve been convinced by the arguments and the evidence in this book, you now know that choice has a downside, an awareness that should 224 | The Paradox of Choice make it easier for you to adopt, and live with, a two options is my limit rule.
Be a Chooser, Not a Picker HOOSERS ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE ABLE T O REFLECT ON WHAT MAKES a decision important, on whether, perhaps, none of the options should be chosen, on whether a new option should be created, and on what a particular choice says about the chooser as an individual.
Being a chooser is better, but to have the time to choose more and pick less, we must be willing to rely on habits, customs, norms, and rules to make some decisions automatic.
To become a satisficer, however, requires that you think carefully 226 | The Paradox of Choice about your goals and aspirations, and that you develop well-defined standards for what is good enough whenever you face a decision.
Because I make a fairly large number of longdistance phone calls and because I was being deluged with unsolicited advertisements from various companies, I found it hard to resist the temptation to try to find the absolute best company and plan for my calling habits.
Given that thinking about the attractiveness of unchosen options will always detract from the satisfaction derived from the chosen one, it is tempting to suggest that we forget about opportunity costs altogether, but often it is difficult or impossible to judge how good an option is except in relation to other options.
No need to experience the diminution of satisfaction that comes from contemplating all the other things you might have done with the money.
When a decision is final, we engage in a variety of psychological processes that enhance our feelings about the choice we made rela- What to Do About Choice | 229 tive to the alternatives.
The only way to find happiness and stability in the presence of seemingly attractive and tempting options is to say, Im simply not going there.
These objects of gratitude occasionally will be big (a job promotion, a great first date), but most of the time, they will be small (sunlight streaming in through the bedroom window, a kind word from a friend, a piece of swordfish cooked just the way you like it, an informative article in a magazine).
Stop paying so much attention to how others around you are doing is easy advice to give, but hard advice to follow, because the evidence of how others are doing is pervasive, because most of us seem to care a great deal about status, and finally, because access to some of the most important things in life (for example, the best colleges, the best jobs, the best houses in the best neighborhoods) is granted only to those who do better than their peers.
Following the other suggestions Ive made may sometimes mean that when judged by an absolute standard, the results of decisions will be less good than they might otherwise have beenall the more reason to fight the tendency to make social comparisons.
