Because of this complex interaction of many interested parties and forces and the constant evolution of change, it seems to me that the two most important modern skills are these:  Communication skills  Learning and thinking skills Some improvement to communication skills is being addressed by our industry.
Programmers have to learn constantlynot just the stereotypical new technologies but also the problem domain of the application, the whims of the user community, the quirks of their teammates, the shifting sands of the industry, and the evolving characteristics of the project itself as it is built.
1.3 Everyone Is Talking About This Stuff As I was mulling over the idea of writing this book, I started to notice that a lot of people in different disciplines were talking about the topics in which I was interested.
I also noticed that a number of MBA and executive-level courses promote various meditative, creative, and intuitive techniques stuff that fits in perfectly with the available research but that has not yet been passed down to the employees in the trenches, including us knowledge-worker types.
The Dreyfus model of skill acquisition provides a powerful way of looking at how you move beyond beginner-level performance and begin the journey to mastery of a skill.
Well take a look at some of the basics of cognitive science and neuroscience as they relate to our interests as software developers, including a model of the brain that looks a lot like a dual-CPU, shared-bus design and how to do your own brain surgery of a sort.
Note that I mean learning in the broadest sense, covering not only new technologies, programming languages, and the like, but also your learning of the dynamics of the team youre on, the characteristics of the evolving software youre building, and so on.
However, just doing alone is no guarantee of success; you have to learn from the doing for it to count, and it turns out that some common obstacles make this hard.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) G RATEFUL A CKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to Sara Lynn Eastler for the index, to Kim Wimpsett for correcting my many typos and often haphazard grammar, and to Steve Peter for implementing a plethora of typesetting tricks.
Back in the early 1980s, the nursing profession in the United States used the lessons of the Dreyfus model to correct their approach and help advance their profession.
It suggests a course of action that we can pursue in order to meaningfully improve the software development professionboth as individual practitioners and for the industry as a whole.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES When experts do their thing, it appears almost magical to the rest of usstrange incantations, insight that seems to appear out of nowhere, and a seemingly uncanny ability to know the right answer when the rest of us arent even all that sure about the question.
The novice wants to know exactly how long to set the timer on the oven given the weight of the meat, and so on.
I dont know how to respond to mistakes; when the IRS sends me a terse and rather arrogant form letter, I usually have no idea what theyre on about or what to do to fix it.3 There is a solution, of course.
You can set up more rules to explain, and then more rules to explain those, but theres a practical limit to how much you can effectively specify without running into a Clinton-esque It depends upon what the meaning of the word is is.
Stage 2: Advanced Beginners Once past the hurdles of the novice, one begins to see the problems from the viewpoint of the advanced beginner.
Along with the capacity to learn from others comes the ability to understand and apply maxims, which are proverbial, fundamental truths that can be applied to the situation at hand.5 Maxims are not recipes; they have to be applied within a certain context.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES Pragmatic Tips When Dave Thomas and I wrote the original The Pragmatic Programmer, we were trying to convey some of the advice we thought was most relevant to our profession.
Somehow, in the vast array of experiences, distilled judgment, memories, and all the rest of the mental effluvia in the doctors brain, a particular combination of subtle clues in the patient came together and suggested a diagnosis.
The expert knows the difference between irrelevant details and the very important details, perhaps not on a conscious level, but the expert knows which details to focus on and which details can be safely ignored.
In the paper Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing Ones Own Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments [KD99], psychologists Kruger and Dunning relate the unfortunate story of a would-be thief who robbed a bank in broad daylight.
Thats not how you get a good return on investment in a racehorse; you need to let them run.8 Intuition is the tool of the expert in all fields, but organizations tend to discount it because they mistakenly feel that intuition isnt scientific or isnt repeatable.
Often this is called work to rule or malicious obedience, and the idea is that the employees do exactly what their job description calls forno more, no lessand follow the rule book to the letter.
This does a disservice to both novices and experts (and ignores the reality that there is anywhere from a 20:1 to 40:1 difference in productivity among developers, depending on whose study you believe).9 TIP 2 Use rules for novices, intuition for experts.
But the three most important changes along the way are the following:10  Moving away from reliance on rules to intuition In 1968, a difference of 10:1 in productivity among programmers was noted in Exploratory Experimental Studies Comparing Online and Offline [Sac68].
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D REYFUS AT W ORK : H ERDING R ACEHORSES AND R ACING S HEEP Figure 2.3: Dreyfus model of skill acquisition  A change in perception, where a problem is no longer a collection of equally relevant bits but a complete and unique whole where only certain bits are relevant  Finally, a change from being a detached observer of the problem to an involved part of the system itself This is the progression from novice to expert, away from detached and absolute rules and into intuition and (remember systems thinking?)
The Sad Fact of Skill Distribution Now at this point youre probably thinking that the great bulk of people fall smack in the middlethat the Dreyfus model follows a standard distribution, which is a typical bell curve.
stage, advanced beginner, performing the tasks they need and learning new tasks as the need arises but never acquiring a more broad-based, conceptual understanding of the task environment.11 A more accurate distribution is shown in Figure 2.4, on the following page.
Anecdotal evidence for the phenomenon abounds, from the rise of copy-and-paste coding (now using Google as part of the IDE) to the widespread misapplication of software design patterns.
According to a study in Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing Ones Own Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments [KD99], the only path to a more correct self-assessment is to improve the individuals skill level, which in turn increases metacognitive ability.
Also, given the phenomenon that experts are often unable to articulate why they reached a particular decision, you may find that someone at a competent level might be in a better position to teach a novice than an expert would be.
The hallmark of the expert is their use of intuition and the ability to recognize pat- Intuition and pattern terns in context.
This transition from the novices context-free rules to the experts context-dependent intuition is one of the most interesting parts of the Dreyfus model; so our goal, for most of the rest of this book, is to see how we might better harness intuition and get better at recognizing and applying patterns.12 2.4 Using the Dreyfus Model Effectively By the late 1970s or so, the nursing profession was in dire straits.
Allow me to slightly edit this bullet list to reflect software development:  Coders themselves were often disregarded as a mere commodity; they just carried out the highly trained analysts orders and werent expected to have any input on the design and architecture of the project.
This attitude was enculturated in part by the doctors, who werent in a position to see the constant, low-level changes in patients conditions, and in part by the nurses themselves, who willingly abdicated responsibility for decision making in the course of practice to the authority of the doctors.
In one experiment,14 a researcher calls a hospital ward posing as a doctor and orders the nurse to give a particular medication to a given patient.
But despite these clear warning signs, 95 percent of the nurses fell for it and went straight to the medicine cabinet, en route to the patients room to dose em up.
You may learn all the chords and techniques required to play jazz, but you have to play it in order to get the feel.
Keeping Expertise in Practice The nursing profession was losing expertise rapidly; because of the limits of pay scales and career development, nurses with high skill levels would reach a point in their careers where they were forced to move out of direct clinical practice and into areas of management or education or move out of the field entirely.
The question isnt the position they play, or even their years of experience; the question is, what is the value they bring to the organization?
Theres the old story of the young project manager, where his senior programmer announced she was pregnant and going to deliver during the project, and he protested that this wasnt on the project plan.
Oversimplification of complex situations Early proponents of the Rational Unified Process (and some recent ones) cling to the notion that all you have to do is just follow the process.
Context is critical to expert performance, and formal methods tend to lose any nuances of context in their formulations (they have to; otherwise, it would take thousands of pages just to describe how to get coffee in the morning).
2.6 Consider the Context, Again One of the most important lessons from the Dreyfus model is the realization that although the novice needs context-free rules, the expert uses context-dependent intuition.
John Steinbeck, The Sea of Cortez Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C ONSIDER THE C ONTEXT, A GAIN In The Sea of Cortez, Steinbeck muses on the interplay of context and truth.
The living fish, in the context of its habitat, is a fundamentally different reality from the preserved fish in the jar in the lab.
Fair enough, but consider the difference context might make: opening the door to rescue the baby on the other side in a burning house is quite a different exercise than picking the lock and leaving no traces at the Watergate Hotel, for instance.
To embark on this path to expertise, well need to do the following:  Cultivate more intuition  Realize the increasing importance of context and of observing situational patterns  Better harness our own experience To see how to accomplish these goals, well start the next chapter by taking a closer look at how the brain works.
The brain actually plans out your motion slightly differently each and every time, much to the chagrin of golfers, pitchers, and bowlers.1 The brain is a horrifically complicated squishy lump of stuff.
You can continue to cut the film in half indefinitely, and smaller and smaller pieces will continue to contain a representation of the whole image.
Thats why if you see something faint out of the corner of your eye (such as a ship on the horizon or a star), it can disappear if you look at it head-on.
Have you ever had the solution to a vexing problem (a bug, a design problem, the name of a long-forgotten band) come to you while youre in the shower?
Your brain saves it (writes it to disk, if you will) but doesnt create a pointer to it or an index for it.4 Have you ever driven to work in the morning and realized with a start that you have no memory of actually driving the last ten minutes?
Well see how to take advantage of that and look at particular techniques to help get around some of the other problems with R-mode Technically, of course, there is no indexing going on, so its more like being at the end of a very long hash bucket with decreasing activation energy at each link.
You might think that the narrative voice in your head is in control and that the voice is your consciousness, or the real you.
Fewer still then have the resources to make a good idea a success.7 To make it into the top of the pyramid shown in Figure 3.3, on the next page, you have to at least keep track of your good ideas.
The fastest processing modes are the muscle-memory sorts of responses that dont even travel up to the cortex itself.8 Piano players dont think about each and every note and chord in a fast passage; there isnt time.
In the 1970s, psychobiologist Roger W. Sperry pioneered the famous split-brain studies, where he discovered that the left and right hemispheres process information quite differently from each other (and just to add a little street credibility, he won the Nobel Prize for this work in 1981).
Right Brain Theres really no such thing as left brain and right brain thinking per se; the various lobes of the brain and structures at different levels cooperate in a highly distributed fashion, from the older, reptilian-like mechanisms up to the more recently added neocortex.
Dr. Betty Edwards, of Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain [Edw01] fame, was the first to break out of the right/left brain mold and referred to these simply as L mode and R mode.
L-mode gives you these abilities: Verbal Using words to name, describe, and define Analytic Figuring things out step-by-step and part-by-part Symbolic Using a symbol to stand for something Abstract Taking out a small bit of information and using it to represent the whole thing Temporal Keeping track of time and sequencing one thing after another Rational Drawing conclusions based on reason and facts Digital Using numbers as in counting Logical Drawing conclusions based on logic (theorems, well-stated arguments) Linear Thinking in terms of linked ideas, one thought directly following another, often leading to a convergent conclusion This is clearly the motherhood-and-apple-pie of the white-collar, information-worker, engineering kind of life.
In fact, synthesis is such a powerful learning technique that Nicholas Negroponte of the MIT Media Lab suggested in Dont Dissect the Frog, Build It [Neg94] that to really learn about a frog, traditional dissection is not the way to go.
In fact, you can do a lot of things to increase the amount of brain power you can bring to bear on a problem, by leveraging both modes of thinking as appropriatefrom simple techniques such as fiddling with something with your hand while you think to doodling while on the phone to some really interestingand exotic techniques.
3.4 Rise of the R-mode As you may have felt from looking at the characteristics of L-mode and R-mode, we have a bit of cultural bias toward L-mode thinking and related activities, and we might tend to dismiss R-mode thinking as being the province of lesser mortals.
And indeed, it was the strengths of L-mode that differentiated humankind from common beasts; it brought humanity out of the forests and jungles and into villages and towns, out of the fields and into the factories, finally to land behind a desk and a copy of Microsoft Word.
In his popular book A Whole New Mind: Moving from the Information Age to the Conceptual Age [Pin05], Dan makes the case that economic and societal forces have taken us to the point where these artistic, aesthetic, R-mode attributes arent a neat luxury for Martha Stewart types who want to craft their own greeting cards; instead, they are positively required for plain old, mainstream business.
The box is replete with a multipage foldout of legal disclaimers, third-party endorsements, and, in big print, the fact that its a 30GB model* (complete with an asterisk explaining that a gigabyte aint exactly a billion bytes, your mileage will vary, and you dont actually get all that space anyway.
Researchers in Japan did a study of a banks ATM interfaces; subjects found the aesthetically pleasing button layouts much easier to use than the ugly ones, even though the functionality and workflow was the same.
Aesthetics make a difference, whether its in a user interface, the layout of your code and comments, the choices of variable names, the arrangement of your desktop, or whatever.
Creativity comes from the selection and assembly of just the right components in just the right presentation to create the work.
The hemispheres in your brain tackle this problem of identification differently; one hemisphere is better at identifying the local criteria (the small letters), and the other is better at the global criteria (the big letter).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) DIY B RAIN S URGERY AND N EUROPLASTICITY If by chance you arent a math prodigy, then we need to take a look at some other way to get the R-mode and L-mode to cooperate: to better integrate L-mode and R-mode processing.
Instead, the human brain is wonderfully plasticso much so that researchers have been able to teach a blind man to see with his tongue.20 They took a video camera chip and wired its output to the patients tongue in a small 16x16-pixel arrangement.
Neuroplasticity (the plastic nature of the brain) also means that the maximum amount you can learn, or the number of skills you attain, is not fixed.
Sure, some of what you find will be the intellectual equivalent of a Gilligans Island rerun, but you may also find that one idea that makes all the difference in the world.
4.1 Turn Up the Sensory Input The simplest thing you can do to begin to involve more of your brain in problem solving and creativity is to activate more neural pathways than usual.
Object-oriented design with Lego bricks is quite effective with a group of people: everyone can participate without fighting for the keyboard or the whiteboard marker; you can animate the actions and behaviors easily, and it encourages multisensory involvement.
To access the perceptual R-mode of the brain, its necessary to present the brain with a job that the verbal, analytic L-mode will turn down.
Or as Jerre Levy (prominent Cal Tech student of Sperry) says, you want to look at setting up conditions that cause you to make a mental shift to a different mode of information processingthe slightly altered state of consciousnessthat enables you to see well.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D RAW ON THE R IGHT S IDE Role-Playing Johanna Rothman describes her experience using roles to work through some design issues: The team was working on the project to save the company.
The scheduler would have a whistle, the requests would stand in their appropriate queue, the director would tell the request where to go, and so on.
Feel R-mode with a Cognitive Shift It was Dr. Edwards who first suggested that to get at the real perception you need to shut down the L-mode and let the R-mode do the task for which it is best suited.
There was some grumbling in the crowdwe had paid good money for this introductory package, and here the instructor was just throwing us to the wolves (or to the rocks, as the case may be).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW The Lozanov Seance In the late 1970s, Bulgarian psychologist Georgi Lozanov began experimenting with what he termed a seance.4 The idea was to create a learning environment that would help create an R-mode to L-mode flow, in this case, specifically for foreign language training.
In her book Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life, Lamott explains the dangers of perfectionism: Perfectionism is the voice of the oppressor, the enemy of the people.
The truth is that you will die anyway and that a lot of people who arent even looking at their feet are going to do a whole lot better than you, and have a lot more fun while theyre doing it.
One reason this might work so well is that while the driver is locked in verbal mode Work with one person in at a particular level of detail, the navigator L-mode, one in is free to engage more nonverbal centers.
This is sometimes a source of disagreement; the navigator says: All that code over here is exactly the same as that other thing over there, I meanbeside all the words.... And the driver disagrees, because he just cannot see it while driving.
Metaphor, a common ground for both verbalizations and images, is a way to voyage back and forth between the subconscious and conscious, between right and left hemispheres.8 The use of metaphor is a powerful technique to open up creativity.
Juxtaposing Frames of Reference Metaphor comes from the Greek meaning to transfer, with the idea that you are transferring the properties of one object to another in a way that is not literally possible.
The characteristics of the smoky frame of reference joins with the frame of reference for emotion (love); it begins to impart many of its known (but unstated) features onto the emotional frame.
All metaphors break down eventually, but the idea was that a sufficiently rich metaphor could help guide the design of a system and help answer questions that come up during development (this idea is somewhat similar to our discussion of system invariants in The Pragmatic Programmer: From Journeyman to Master [HT00]).
The features of the metaphorical frame of reference can imprint themselves onto the software system; implicit, well-understood properties of the real world start to transfer into the software itself.
What made them odd was that they had holes in the end, in the barbed tip of the spear; it was almost like holes in a handheld sewing needle but up at the tip.
Hey... Elias went on to receive the first American-issued patent for an automatic sewing machine, based on his hard-won inspiration that the hole for the needle needed to be opposite the normal, handheld orientation.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES Figure 4.3: Elias Howes patent The R-mode has to throw it over the fence visually, in this case wrapped up in the disturbingand very memorableimagery of an outlandish dream.
Its not magic, and it may or may not work for you, but it does seem to be a reasonable way of checking in with the rest of your brain.
Sometimes the material is relatively dullwhat the weather was doing, how the prices at the market were up, how the scullery maid ran off with the stable boy, and so Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES Tools and Interference When you try to start any creative endeavor, such as writing on a blog, an article, or (heaven help you) a full-length book, you will encounter massive resistance.
Resistance can take many forms, from niggling self-doubt to wildly creative procrastination to a myriad assortment of other distractions and excuses (see The War of Art: Break Through the Blocks and Win Your Inner Creative Battles [Pre02] for a disturbingly complete catalog of the many manifestations of resistance).
The Morning Pages Technique This is a technique that I first heard about in the context of a writers workshop (also described in The Artists Way [Cam02]); its a common technique for authors.
Here are the rules:  Write your morning pages first thing in the morningbefore your coffee, before the traffic report, before talking to Mr. Showerhead, before packing the kids off to school or letting the dog out.
Then when you get around to building the wall, you look into the stone pile and find a nice match for the section youre working on at the moment.
You walk the path to sort of give the L-mode something to do and free up the R-mode.
However, try to avoid just walking around the office because that might offer too many distractions: a co-workers conversation, an impromptu meeting with the boss or client, or an assessment of the latest sports scores or political intrigue at the water cooler all will distract you from the problem in a negative way.
Cna yuo raed tihs?18 Aoccdrnig to rscheearch, it dsenot mtaetr in waht oerdr the ltteres in a wrod are; the olny iproamtnt tihng is taht the frsit and lsat ltteer be in the rghit pclae.
Letter Position in Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Word Recognition [Raw76] and Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVESTING P ATTERNS Using Martial Arts to Improve Focus June Kim tells us the following story: After beginning martial arts, I recognized that my focus span (the period of time I can keep focusing on something) and control (such as getting focused in a poor environment) has improved.
The indented code makes it nice and readable, but thats not how the compiler sees it: Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVESTING P ATTERNS only the first statement binds to the else; the indention is misleading.
this effect: if youre at the higher skill levels and youre encountering resistance from the rest of the team, understand that they literally dont see it the same way you do.
Using a Whack on the Side of Your Head Many times its hard to see things that are right in front of you, because you get used The only difference to seeing patterns in a certain way.
But interestingly, researchers discovered that youll understand what the word means before understanding its function in the sentence.24 This technique helps keep the text active and keeps the reader engagedbreaking the reader out of the usual rut of standard idioms and clichs.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) G ET I T R IGHT Although using a functional shift will create a brain burst in your readers, it will likely cause agita (that is, dyspepsia of the soul) on the part of ones copy editor.
You dont want to focus on R-mode at the exclusion of L-mode, and you dont want to continue to focus on L-mode to the exclusion of R-mode.
The modern idea of debugging a computer comes from a real buga moth trapped in a relay of the Mark II Aiken Relay Calculator (see Figure 5.1, on the following page).
The operators removed the bug, dutifully taped it to the log book, and so truly debugged the system.2 This is pretty well-worn territory; see, for example, The Power of Intuition: How to Use Your Gut Feelings to Make Better Decisions at Work [Kle04].
None of us has ready access to the source code to fix these bugs, but I can help show you where they occur so that you can be more aware of the influence of these erroneous processes on your thinking.
Symbolic reduction fallacy As we saw earlier, L-mode is anxious to provide a quick symbol to represent a complex object or system, which loses at least the nuances and sometimes even the truth of the matter.
Weve seen examples of the symbolic reduction fallacy before; for instance, when youre trying to draw a human hand, the L-mode reduces the complexity of light, shadow, and texture to five lines and a stick.
The concept of the platonic fold, described in The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable [Tal07], emphasizes that humans are really bad at trying to extrapolate future events from previous events.
For example, I was cleaning my office last year when I stumbled upon a stack of magazines dating from the early to mid-1990s (I also found a 14.4 modem in the middle of a tangle of active cables, but thats another story).
5.2 Recognize Your Generational Affinity Anything that is in the world when youre born is normal and ordinary and is just a natural part of the way the world works.
As Douglas Adams points out, the biases you form change over time, and taken as a whole, the biases that drive any particular generation will be different from the biases that drive you and your peers.
The attitudes, philosophies, and values of your parents and your cohort (those born about the same time as you; your peers throughout school and in the workplace; members of your generation) have a tremendous impact on your values, attitudes, and perceptions.
You and the rest of your cohort are united by shared memories, common habits, and popular styles, as well as your age and station Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY in life at that time.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY The GI Generation, 19011924 This generation produced the first Miss America and propagated the idea of the all-American athlete.
The tendency for this generation is to see themselves of arbiters of national values; they have always wanted to teach the world to sing (remember the 1970s Coca Cola commercial?).
The Four Archetypes According to researchers Neil Howe and William Strauss,12 if you look back through American history in the United States and Anglo-American history in Europe all the way back to the Renaissance, youll find only four prototypical, generational archetypes.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY Figure 5.3: Howe/Strauss generational archetypes According to the Howe and Strauss model, I am among the eldest of Generation X, on the cusp of the Boomers.14 I tend to identify with the theoretical Gen X characteristics, especially survivalism, pragmatism, and realism.
Its based on the work of Carl Jung and categorizes your tendencies along four independent axes.15 According to the MBTI, you fall somewhere on the line for each dimension, and you get a letter depending on which way you lean.
Seventy-five percent of the population lean to the extravert end of the scale.16 The other twenty-five percent of us wish theyd leave us alone.
A bleeding-heart F type is not going to be convinced to ignore human suffering and just follow the rules, and a rigid T type is not going to be swayed by the drama and deviate from the rules.
You can tell from the dialogue that this is a repeat (You always..., You never...) or by the characters (the Cable TV Police, the Net Police, the Legion of Idiots...).
In the old days of letter writing, the time it took to write longhand and the built-in delay before sending (awaiting the postal carrier) both allowed the cooler neocortex to intervene and remind you that perhaps this wasnt such a great idea.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OW I D ON  T K NOW W HAT TO T HINK You know what it feels like to have that rush of intense feeling come upwhen the boss sends you a snippy email or that rude driver cuts you off to exit without signaling.
Theres some evidence that simply smiling can be as effective as antidepressant medications.19 5.5 Now I Dont Know What to Think The fact that we live at the bottom of a deep gravity well, on the surface of a gas-covered planet going around a nuclear fireball 90 million miles away and think this to be normal is obviously some indication of how skewed our perspective tends to be.
A sheep dip (for real) is a large tank in which you dunk the unsuspecting sheep to clean them up and rid them of parasites (see Figure 6.1, on the following page).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) W HAT L EARNING I S ... AND I SN  T Ignite Your Own Fire We must encourage [each other]once we have grasped the basic pointsto interconnecting everything else on our own, to use memory to guide our original thinking, and to accept what someone else says as a starting point, a seed to be nourished and grow.
Suppose someone were to go and ask his neighbors for fire and find a substantial blaze there, and just stay there continually warming himself: that is no different from someone who goes to someone else to get to some of his rationality, and fails to realize that he ought to ignite his own flame, his own intellect, but is happy to sit entranced by the lecture, and the words trigger only associative thinking and bring, as it were, only a flush to his cheeks and a glow to his limbs; but he has not dispelled or dispersed, in the warm light of philosophy, the internal dank gloom of his mind.
Plutarch, Greek historian, biographer, and essayist As Plutarch pointed out in the epigraph that opened this chapter, the mind is not a vessel to be filled but a fire to be kindledyour own fire.
The model you build in your mind, the questions you ask to build that model, and your experiences and practices built up along the way and that you use daily are far more relevant to your performance.
You need continuing goals, you need to get feedback to understand your progress, and you need to approach the whole thing far more deliberately than a oncea-year course in a stuffy classroom.
Goals are great things, and you may have many of them: lose weight, find a better job, move to a bigger house (or a smaller one), write that novel, learn to play the electric guitar, write a killer Rails application, or learn all about Erlang.
To help you focus on your goalsand be in a better position to attain themallow me to suggest an old favorite from the consultants bag of tricks: using SMART objectives to meet your goals.3 In this case, SMART stands for Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-boxed.
For any goal you have in mind (losing weight, deposing your boss, conquering the world, and so on), you need to have a plan: a series of objectives that will help get to your goal.
Johanna Rothman Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C REATE A P RAGMATIC I NVESTMENT P LAN So in addition to looking at goals through a local lens, consider the impact they may have in the larger context of your work and life.
Theres nothing more frustrating than clearing the calendar, escaping from the daily pressures of job and family, only to sit down in front of a blank screen and wonder what to do next.
For example, if I wanted to learn the FXRuby GUI toolkit, Id be sure to get the book first, download the components I need, and Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE Y OUR P RIMARY L EARNING M ODE Figure 6.2: Obligatory diagram for visual learners have an idea for something I want to write using FXRuby before sitting down and working with it in earnest.
In fact, some methods of determining your learning style tie in to your personality, using the dimensions of personality popularized by Carl Jung and later enshrined in the Myers Briggs Type Indicator (as we saw in Section 5.3, Codifying Your Personality Tendencies, on page 144).
Malcolm Knowles, in The Adult Learner: a Neglected Species [Kno90], identifies these characteristics of the adult learner and their learning environment:  The adult learner is motivated to learn if learning will satisfy their own interests and needs.
This technique of studying a book or other printed matter is known as SQ3R; thats an acronym for the steps you need to take.10  Survey: Scan the table of contents and chapter summaries for an overview.
Try to use the information from the book: try to write a program in that language from scratch (different from any of the exercises or toy programs in the book itself).
Invented by British author Tony Buzan in The Mind Map Book: How to Use Radiant Thinking to Maximize Your Brains Untapped Potential [BB96], similar styles of diagrams have been around since at least the third century.12 A modern mind map is a sort of two-dimensional, organic, and holistic outline.
Its greatly reduced to fit in the book, so dont worry about trying to read the individual labelsjust get a sense of the structure and flow.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) V ISUALIZE I NSIGHT WITH M IND M APS Figure 6.4: Original Dreyfus mind mapmessy, organic When creating a mind map, avoid filling in the elements in a clockwise mannerthats just an outline going in circles.13 When I give lectures on this topic, I usually stop here and ask the audience whether they have ever heard of, or used, mind maps.
Spatial cueing conveys information to you in a way that linear words or an outline cant; the addition of color and symbols adds to the richness of the representation.
You can write smaller (without resorting to a font selection box), and you can squeeze things to the edge of the page and connect them with lines.
Youll have a general idea of the major topics, but as particular details emerge and as you begin to see which items are related to each other and how, the map will fill in, and a picture of your understanding will emerge.
This will help get the L-mode out of the way and allow the R-mode unfettered access to the paper.
Start the mind map, and leave it handyespecially if you dont have a lot of information to add to it just yet (as well see a little later, just having a place to put related ideas is a great help).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) V ISUALIZE I NSIGHT WITH M IND M APS Figure 6.6: Affinity grouping in progress Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARNESS THE R EAL P OWER OF D OCUMENTING Since the sticky notes let you detach and reapply, you can reposition the notes as needed.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARNESS THE R EAL P OWER OF D OCUMENTING but they use a pragmatic filter to make sure the investment in creating any documentation is really worth the effort.
I sat down to do so at the airport one day, and the owner of the school nudged another student, pointed to me, and said, Watch this, this is cool.
To save some wear and tear on the carpet (and your co-worker), we suggest you place a surrogatea yellow rubber duck, for instancenear your screen and, when you get stuck, just talk to the duck.
This is a great opportunity to explain what you really do for a living to your great Aunt Edna, and its a great exercise to start to see things from your audiences point of view and to develop metaphors that will help explain and clarify the material youre working with.
Having to go back to the well while preparing to teach, and Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T AKE I T TO THE S TREETS while having to think on your feet to respond to questions, all helps strengthen your neural connections.
In the meanwhile, its time to begin to take it to the streetsto leave the relatively safe cloisters of the cubicle and begin to interact with the world to advance your personal learning.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) We should be careful to get out of an experience only the wisdom that is in it and stop there; lest we be like the cat that sits on a hot stove-lid; he will never sit on a hot stove-lid againand that is well; but also he will never sit on a cold one anymore.
However, just doing alone is no guarantee of success; you have to learn from the doing for it to count, and it turns out that some common obstacles make this hard.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen P LAY IN O RDER TO L EARN We seem to have a cultural tendency to put the cart before the horse: you struggle to shovel in information first and then hope to maybe use it later.
Papert is perhaps the leading expert on using technology to create new ways of learning.1 He invented the programming language Logo: a toy that children could play with and, in the playing, learn deep mathematical concepts.
By changing their viewpoint to that of the turtle, the students could leverage their existing real-world knowledge of walking, turning, and so on, to explore the microworld of the turtle.
The Meanings of Play As Im using it here, the first meaning of the word play is similar to what weve talked about earlier in the book, in the sense of nongoal-directed exploration.
Were not really designed to just receive information but rather to explore and build mental models on our Papert and Marvin Minsky founded the Artificial Intelligence Lab at MIT; he also was one of the founders of the famed MIT Media Lab.
I was on a business trip last week, and the flight attendant gave a little twist to the usual boring preflight speech: the entire speech, including the canned, legally specified parts, was set in a Dr. Seussstyle rhyme.
From proper use of the seat belt to the dire warnings about disabling the smoke detector in the lavatory2 to proper handling of the oxygen masks and life rafts, it all rhymed in a well-orchestrated meter.
I mentioned using Lego blocks for design back in Chapter 4, Get in Your Right Mind, on page 85 for the same reason: the idea is to engage as much of your entire being in the learning process: verbal, visual, musical, numerical, gross-motor body movement, fine-motor finger movement, and so on.
George Plya wrote a very influential book on concrete steps to problem solving that covers these and other classic techniques (How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method [PC85]; see the sidebar on the current page for a brief synopsis).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E MBED F AILING IN P RACTICE The danger lies in not completing the transition and sticking with the hybridized approach instead of fully embracing the new skill.
Examples include moving from the horse and buggy to the automobile, from the typewriter to the computer, from procedural programming to object-oriented programming, and from single programs on the desktop to cloud computing.
Whether its on a corporate team or a solo experiment in the dark watches of the night, you need the following: Freedom to experiment Few problems have a single, best solution.
Reproduce any work product as of any time Backtracking to a previous version of the source code isnt quite enough; you probably need to actually run the program (or work with any derivative work product) as of any point in history.
(On the Mac, you can often Control-click [or right-click] a word and have the option to look it up in the dictionary or search using Google for that word.
Understanding the inner game will help you eliminate interference that gets in the way of learning, and it emphasizes the right kind of feedback to help you learn.
In this series of books, Timothy Gallwey and other authors differentiate the obvious, outer game that you are engaged in and explore the subtleties of the more critical inner game.
In a famous example, the author takes an older subject, a woman in her late fifties or so, who has never played tennis or indeed Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN A BOUT THE I NNER G AME engaged in any significant physical activity for the past twenty years.
The next exercise was to listen to the sound of the ball hitting the racket.
She made the first point of the game and played a very respectable, lengthy set of volleys.8 In another example, you hit balls across the court where a chair is sitting.
The idea is not to try to hit the chair but to simply note where the ball lands in relation to the chair.
The inner game theory has the solution: instead of issuing a stream of instructions to the student, the idea is to teach the student awareness and to use that awareness to correct their performance.
For example, in the The Inner Game of Music [GG86], the author relates the story of teaching a concert string bass player.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN A BOUT THE I NNER G AME The author had been teaching in a manner similar to the ski instructor: hold your elbow this way, your head like this, lean that way, now play comfortably.
Performing music, for instance, has been shown by functional MRI scans to activate virtually every center in the brain.10 From operating the instrument to reading the notes, listening to the other musicians, following the abstract principles of chord progression and such, both L-mode and R-mode are active and cooperating along with lower-level muscle memory.
Jerry Weinberg maintains that most clients will tell you their most serious problem, and its solution, in the first five minutes you talk with them.11 Its vital to listen to what the client has to say, instead of letting your attention wander to the cool solution youre dying to try.
As part of a ten-year study on creativity in the workplace, Amabile and colleagues discovered just the opposite: you are the least creative when you feel time pressure.
The group of ten to twelve people was split into workers, managers, customers, and so on; buffet tables in the conference room became the factory, and index cards tracked production, orders, and the like.
By continuing this practice even off the field, the brain gets grooved.19 It becomes used to the experience of doing things correctly so that when the time comes to do it in the field, success comes naturally.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN I T LIKE AN E XPER T Swimmers do this by being attached to a rope and pulled through the water at high speed.20 Before a swimmer can achieve that sort of speed on their own, they get to experience what it will feel like.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN I T LIKE AN E XPER T In this chapter, weve looked at the value of playing to facilitate learning and the importance of actively embedding failure as an essential part of practice.
But First, Cut the Green Wire It seems that anytime a character in a movie is given instructions on how to defuse a bomb, they start pulling out the parts and cutting the wires in the prescribed order in earnest.
But then a day at work in the real world gets in the wayall the emails, the meetings, the design problems, the bugs.
It is not a bolt to be tightened into place but a seed to be planted and to bear more seed toward the hope of greening the landscape of idea.
You need to be able to focus on the information that you want, filter the information you are bombarded with, and have the right information available to you at the right time, without being distracted by irrelevant details and without missing subtle clues that make all the difference.
In this part of the book, we are going to look at how to better manage your mind along these three axes:  Increasing focus and attention  Managing your knowledge  Optimizing your current context Attention is the act of focusing in on an area of interest.
Paul Graham, in his book Hackers and Painters: Big Ideas from the Computer Age [Gra04], suggests that a navy pilot can land a 40,000 lb aircraft at 140mph on a pitching Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I NCREASE F OCUS AND A TTENTION carrier deck at night more safely than the average teenager can cut a bagel.
Much of meditation, yoga, and similar practices aim for the same goal: to offer some relief from that gibbering Lmode monkey voice in your head, to live in the moment, and to not divide your mental energy unnecessarily.
It originates from a Buddhist tradition, but you dont need to be a Buddhistor anything else in particularto use it effectively.3 What you want to attain here is not a trance or to fall asleep or to relax or to contemplate the Great Mystery or any of that (there are other forms of meditation for those particular activities).
Be aware of the rhythm of your breath, the length and qualities of the inhale, the brief pause at the top of the cycle, the qualities of the exhale, and the brief pause at the bottom.
Consider the breath to be made of air traveling in three distinct segments:  The lower belly and abdomen  The chest and rib cage  The very upper chest and collar bones (but not into the throat) Exhale fully.
On the inhale, fill the lower belly first, pause ever so slightly, then fill the chest, and finally fill er up all the way to the collar bones.
In any case, you want to maintain awareness of the breath and the feeling of air in your lungs and then let other thoughts just slide on by.
In fact, the situation is quite the opposite: you need to let go of the problem with your conscious mind and let the problem sit in the marinade of thought for a while.
Dr. Dennett says, Once a particular observation of some feature has been made by a specialized, localized portion of the brain, the information content thus fixed does not have to be sent somewhere else to be rediscriminated by some master discriminator...these spatially and temporally distributed contentfixations in the brain are precisely locatable in both space and time, but their onsets do not mark the onset of consciousness of their content.
Dennetts theory is a very interesting alternative to the so-called Cartesian Theater model, where you assume there is a master center of conscious that directs the activities of the brain and hence you.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE Lets return to the idea of marinating; as hard as it might be to accept, you need time to allow these multiple drafts to ferment, percolate, and develop.
Have you heard of the consultants Rule of Three?7 In general, if you cant think of three ways a plan can go wrong or think of three different solutions to a problem, then you havent thought it through enough.
The real beauty of this approach is that once you have a place to put a specific bit of information, youll notice that new, relevant bits of data suddenly start to show up out of nowhere.
And the more you work with it, the more you may start to see relationships and patterns in the material that you hadnt noticed before.
And again, you can go off and mind map some of the more interesting bits to gain insight and bring that back to the wiki.
Scientists agree that trying to focus on several things at once means youll do poorly at each of them.12 And if that wasnt bad enough, a controversial study done in the United Kingdom noted that if you constantly interrupt your task to check email or respond to an IM text message, your effective IQ drops ten points.
You context switch to the Mail application, bring it up, start to send the email, and notice several new emails have come into your inbox, and now the distraction is right in front of you.
You have to turn your context to the to-do list, and as soon as youre there to type in your new entry, you see all the other things youre supposed to be doing, and once again you are distracted.
Everything from the usual disgust at greedy, rapacious spammers to a cool how-to make your own snow-making-machine video on YouTube; inflammatory Digg postings about yet more election fraud or thieving politicians (as shown in Figure 8.5); a couple of IMs from your closest friends; and a dozen new Wikipedia articlesall there to entice, inform, and distract you.
Your teammates in close proximity will honor the rules youve set up, but what about co-workers in remote offices or all the people you might deal with from other companies, customers, and all the rest of the sea of humanity thats on the other end of an email, IM, or phone call?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE I NTERRUPTIONS D ELIBERATELY of thought and a minimum of twenty to thirty minutes lost productivity once you try to get back into it, if you even get a chance to get back to it today.
One way to try to keep in context is to raise the physical cost of entry and exit to help remind you of the hidden mental cost.
The time between the alert and the start of the next task is the interruption lag.
You have a precious few seconds before the interruption takes hold, before you have to answer the phone or respond to the person in your doorway.
It seems to help, and theres a lot of research on this sort of cue preparation.19,20 Further, if you assume you can get interrupted at just about any point, you can begin to make a habit of constantly leaving little reminders of where you are.
Its important that the two monitors are the same size and brand; you dont want to be distracted by having to refocus on a smaller monitor or adjust to a different color temperature.
The contents of this workspace will vary considerably depending on the language and environment youre writing for, but youd at least have your code editor or IDE, perhaps a unit testing GUI, various browser windows for the app or related documentation, terminal windows with log files, make or ant processes, and so on.
In the novel The Girl with the Pearl Earring, the author describes a fictional account of the painter Vermeer and a serving girl who may have inspired one of Vermeers most well-known paintings (and the title of the book).
No, she says, it has flecks of green and brown, a bit of silver on the edge from a nearby reflection, specks of black where openness of the weave shows the garment underneath, darker yellow where the shadows of the folds of the dress fall, and so on.
