Because of this complex interaction of many interested parties and forces and the constant evolution of change, it seems to me that the two most important modern skills are these:  Communication skills  Learning and thinking skills Some improvement to communication skills is being addressed by our industry.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E VERYONE I S T ALKING A BOUT T HIS S TUFF These kinds of activities utilize very different pathways in the brainpathways that are affected by your very thoughts and how you think them.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) W HERE W E  RE G OING  Learning theory  Nursing, health care, aviation, and other professions and industries  Yoga and meditative practices  Programming, abstraction, and problem solving  Artificial intelligence research When you start to find the same set of ideasthe same common threads Theres something showing up in different guises in these fundamental here.
The Dreyfus model of skill acquisition provides a powerful way of looking at how you move beyond beginner-level performance and begin the journey to mastery of a skill.
Get in Your Right Mind Once we have a better understanding of the brain, we will find ways to exploit underutilized facets of thinking to help encourage better creativity and problem solving, as well as harvest and process experiences more effectively.
Note that I mean learning in the broadest sense, covering not only new technologies, programming languages, and the like, but also your learning of the dynamics of the team youre on, the characteristics of the evolving software youre building, and so on.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) W HERE W E  RE G OING Manage Focus Managing your attention and focus is the next critical step in your journey.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) G RATEFUL A CKNOWLEDGMENTS About the Figures You may notice that figures in this book dont look like the typical shiny, mechanically perfect drawings youd expect from Adobe Illustrator or something similar.
Special thanks also to Dr. Patricia Benner, who introduced the Dreyfus model of skills acquisition to the nursing profession, for her support and permission to quote from her works and for her enthusiasm for learning.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) G RATEFUL A CKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to Sara Lynn Eastler for the index, to Kim Wimpsett for correcting my many typos and often haphazard grammar, and to Steve Peter for implementing a plethora of typesetting tricks.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OVICES VS .
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OVICES VS .
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES When experts do their thing, it appears almost magical to the rest of usstrange incantations, insight that seems to appear out of nowhere, and a seemingly uncanny ability to know the right answer when the rest of us arent even all that sure about the question.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES Unlike other models or assessments that rate the whole person, the Dreyfus model is applicable per skill.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES Advanced beginners can start using advice in the correct context, based on Advanced beginners similar situations theyve experienced in dont want the big the recent past but just barely.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES In the field of software development, were getting there, but even at this level, practitioners cant apply agile methods the way we would likethere isnt yet enough ability for reflection and selfcorrection.
Along with the capacity to learn from others comes the ability to understand and apply maxims, which are proverbial, fundamental truths that can be applied to the situation at hand.5 Maxims are not recipes; they have to be applied within a certain context.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES Pragmatic Tips When Dave Thomas and I wrote the original The Pragmatic Programmer, we were trying to convey some of the advice we thought was most relevant to our profession.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T HE F IVE D REYFUS M ODEL S TAGES Misapplied Patterns and Fragile Methods As you may realize by now, some of the most exciting new movements in the software development community are targeted at proficient and expert developers.
The expert knows the difference between irrelevant details and the very important details, perhaps not on a conscious level, but the expert knows which details to focus on and which details can be safely ignored.
Its actually easy to derail an expert Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D REYFUS AT W ORK : H ERDING R ACEHORSES AND R ACING S HEEP Unskilled and Unaware of It When you are not very skilled in some area, you are more likely to think youre actually pretty expert at it.
In the paper Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing Ones Own Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments [KD99], psychologists Kruger and Dunning relate the unfortunate story of a would-be thief who robbed a bank in broad daylight.
Thats not how you get a good return on investment in a racehorse; you need to let them run.8 Intuition is the tool of the expert in all fields, but organizations tend to discount it because they mistakenly feel that intuition isnt scientific or isnt repeatable.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D REYFUS AT W ORK : H ERDING R ACEHORSES AND R ACING S HEEP Work to Rule In industries or situations where one is not allowed a fullblown strike, a work slowdown is often used as a means of demonstration.
But the three most important changes along the way are the following:10  Moving away from reliance on rules to intuition In 1968, a difference of 10:1 in productivity among programmers was noted in Exploratory Experimental Studies Comparing Online and Offline [Sac68].
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D REYFUS AT W ORK : H ERDING R ACEHORSES AND R ACING S HEEP Figure 2.3: Dreyfus model of skill acquisition  A change in perception, where a problem is no longer a collection of equally relevant bits but a complete and unique whole where only certain bits are relevant  Finally, a change from being a detached observer of the problem to an involved part of the system itself This is the progression from novice to expert, away from detached and absolute rules and into intuition and (remember systems thinking?)
stage, advanced beginner, performing the tasks they need and learning new tasks as the need arises but never acquiring a more broad-based, conceptual understanding of the task environment.11 A more accurate distribution is shown in Figure 2.4, on the following page.
Anecdotal evidence for the phenomenon abounds, from the rise of copy-and-paste coding (now using Google as part of the IDE) to the widespread misapplication of software design patterns.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D REYFUS AT W ORK : H ERDING R ACEHORSES AND R ACING S HEEP Figure 2.4: Skill distribution Also, metacognitive abilities, or the ability of being self-aware, tends to be possible only at the higher skill levels.
According to a study in Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing Ones Own Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments [KD99], the only path to a more correct self-assessment is to improve the individuals skill level, which in turn increases metacognitive ability.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SING THE D REYFUS M ODEL E FFECTIVELY Expert != Teacher Experts arent always the best teachers.
The hallmark of the expert is their use of intuition and the ability to recognize pat- Intuition and pattern terns in context.
This transition from the novices context-free rules to the experts context-dependent intuition is one of the most interesting parts of the Dreyfus model; so our goal, for most of the rest of this book, is to see how we might better harness intuition and get better at recognizing and applying patterns.12 2.4 Using the Dreyfus Model Effectively By the late 1970s or so, the nursing profession was in dire straits.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SING THE D REYFUS M ODEL E FFECTIVELY  Because of pay-scale inequities, expert nurses were leaving direct patient care in droves.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SING THE D REYFUS M ODEL E FFECTIVELY Over the course of the next twenty-five years or so, Benner and subsequent authors and researchers turned their profession around.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SING THE D REYFUS M ODEL E FFECTIVELY Fortunately, they were stopped by an accomplice who explained the experimentand stopped them from carrying out the bogus order.15 We see very much the same problems with programmers and their project managers or project architects.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SING THE D REYFUS M ODEL E FFECTIVELY No Expertise Without Experience Jazz is an art form that relies heavily on real-world experience.
Trumpeter Clark Terry used to tell students the secret to learning music was to go through three phases:  Imitate  Assimilate  Innovate That is, first you imitate existing practice and then slowly assimilate the tacit knowledge and experience over time.
Keeping Expertise in Practice The nursing profession was losing expertise rapidly; because of the limits of pay scales and career development, nurses with high skill levels would reach a point in their careers where they were forced to move out of direct clinical practice and into areas of management or education or move out of the field entirely.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SING THE D REYFUS M ODEL E FFECTIVELY This largely remains the case in software development as well.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) B EWARE THE T OOL T RAP  Timing is everything: the drummer (for a band) or accompanist (for choral groups) has to be solid.
The drummer analogy is stretching it a bit, but I do talk more about the rhythm of development projects in Practices of an Agile Developer: Working in the Real World [SH06].
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) B EWARE THE T OOL T RAP as many people claimed that RUP and CMM process models were the salvation of the industry.
Theres the old story of the young project manager, where his senior programmer announced she was pregnant and going to deliver during the project, and he protested that this wasnt on the project plan.
Even though you want these traits Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) B EWARE THE T OOL T RAP on your team, you may find that management will stop valuing them simply because they cannot be formalized.
Oversimplification of complex situations Early proponents of the Rational Unified Process (and some recent ones) cling to the notion that all you have to do is just follow the process.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C ONSIDER THE C ONTEXT, A GAIN Insensitivity to contextual nuances Formal methods are geared to the typical, not the particular.
Context is critical to expert performance, and formal methods tend to lose any nuances of context in their formulations (they have to; otherwise, it would take thousands of pages just to describe how to get coffee in the morning).
2.6 Consider the Context, Again One of the most important lessons from the Dreyfus model is the realization that although the novice needs context-free rules, the expert uses context-dependent intuition.
John Steinbeck, The Sea of Cortez Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C ONSIDER THE C ONTEXT, A GAIN In The Sea of Cortez, Steinbeck muses on the interplay of context and truth.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D AY - TO -D AY D REYFUS Context matters, but the lower several stages on the Dreyfus model arent skilled enough to know it.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D AY - TO -D AY D REYFUS TIP 7 Learn the skill of learning.
To embark on this path to expertise, well need to do the following:  Cultivate more intuition  Realize the increasing importance of context and of observing situational patterns  Better harness our own experience To see how to accomplish these goals, well start the next chapter by taking a closer look at how the brain works.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) The human brain starts working the moment you are born and never stops until you stand up to speak in public.
Thats because the images, feelings, and overall experience are R-mode things: your dream was Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) Y OUR D UAL -CPU M ODES Holographic Memory Memory is stored holographically, in the sense that your memory has certain properties of a hologram.
http://pressesc.com/news/1088/16082007/memories-can-be-erased-scientists-find Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) Y OUR D UAL -CPU M ODES database describing the faces of the people you know in such a way that you could recognize them based on that description?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L INEAR AND R ICH C HARACTERISTICS There is of course plenty to talk about with these two major modes of thinking and consciousness, R-mode and L-mode, and what they can do for you.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L INEAR AND R ICH C HARACTERISTICS Figure 3.4: Split-brain subjects showing sensory preference Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L INEAR AND R ICH C HARACTERISTICS Left Brain vs.
Dr. Betty Edwards, of Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain [Edw01] fame, was the first to break out of the right/left brain mold and referred to these simply as L mode and R mode.
L-mode gives you these abilities: Verbal Using words to name, describe, and define Analytic Figuring things out step-by-step and part-by-part Symbolic Using a symbol to stand for something Abstract Taking out a small bit of information and using it to represent the whole thing Temporal Keeping track of time and sequencing one thing after another Rational Drawing conclusions based on reason and facts Digital Using numbers as in counting Logical Drawing conclusions based on logic (theorems, well-stated arguments) Linear Thinking in terms of linked ideas, one thought directly following another, often leading to a convergent conclusion This is clearly the motherhood-and-apple-pie of the white-collar, information-worker, engineering kind of life.
To those of us firmly Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L INEAR AND R ICH C HARACTERISTICS entrenched in the L-mode way, the R-mode traits may sound a little strange, fuzzy, or even acutely uncomfortable.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L INEAR AND R ICH C HARACTERISTICS Figure 3.5: R-mode attributes Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L INEAR AND R ICH C HARACTERISTICS Theres nothing wrong with that; just because a thought process is nonrational or nonrepeatable doesnt mean it is unscientific, irresponsible, or inappropriate in any way.
In fact, synthesis is such a powerful learning technique that Nicholas Negroponte of the MIT Media Lab suggested in Dont Dissect the Frog, Build It [Neg94] that to really learn about a frog, traditional dissection is not the way to go.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ISE OF THE R- MODE TIP 9 Learn by synthesis as well as by analysis.
In fact, you can do a lot of things to increase the amount of brain power you can bring to bear on a problem, by leveraging both modes of thinking as appropriatefrom simple techniques such as fiddling with something with your hand while you think to doodling while on the phone to some really interestingand exotic techniques.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ISE OF THE R- MODE Mr. Lutz is a former Marine and pilot.
In his popular book A Whole New Mind: Moving from the Information Age to the Conceptual Age [Pin05], Dan makes the case that economic and societal forces have taken us to the point where these artistic, aesthetic, R-mode attributes arent a neat luxury for Martha Stewart types who want to craft their own greeting cards; instead, they are positively required for plain old, mainstream business.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ISE OF THE R- MODE Attractive Works Better Several studies13,14,15 have conclusively shown that attractive user interfaces are easier to use than unattractive (or to use the scientific term, ugly) interfaces.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ISE OF THE R- MODE Cubicles Kill Neurons You may have always heard that you start off with a certain number of brain cells, and thats all you get.
Aesthetics make a difference, whether its in a user interface, the layout of your code and comments, the choices of variable names, the arrangement of your desktop, or whatever.
Creativity comes from the selection and assembly of just the right components in just the right presentation to create the work.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R- MODE S EES F OREST ; L- MODE S EES T REES Consider the following figure:18 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Here we have an H character made up of individual I characters.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) DIY B RAIN S URGERY AND N EUROPLASTICITY If by chance you arent a math prodigy, then we need to take a look at some other way to get the R-mode and L-mode to cooperate: to better integrate L-mode and R-mode processing.
Neuroplasticity (the plastic nature of the brain) also means that the maximum amount you can learn, or the number of skills you attain, is not fixed.
In this chapter, weve looked at features of your brain, including the L-mode and R-mode cognitive processes, and at rewiring your Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H OW D O Y OU G ET T HERE ?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) A man should learn to detect and foster that gleam of light which flashes across his mind from within far more than the lustre of the whole firmament without.
4.1 Turn Up the Sensory Input The simplest thing you can do to begin to involve more of your brain in problem solving and creativity is to activate more neural pathways than usual.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D RAW ON THE R IGHT S IDE  Act out the roles involved.
The vast majority in Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D RAW ON THE R IGHT S IDE every case agrees with my own self-assessment: we suck at drawing.
Or as Jerre Levy (prominent Cal Tech student of Sperry) says, you want to look at setting up conditions that cause you to make a mental shift to a different mode of information processingthe slightly altered state of consciousnessthat enables you to see well.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D RAW ON THE R IGHT S IDE Role-Playing Johanna Rothman describes her experience using roles to work through some design issues: The team was working on the project to save the company.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen STOP Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D RAW ON THE R IGHT S IDE Figure 4.1: Is this Your House?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW Go Climb a Wall Once upon a time, my wife thought it would be fun for us to try rock climbing.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW The Lozanov Seance In the late 1970s, Bulgarian psychologist Georgi Lozanov began experimenting with what he termed a seance.4 The idea was to create a learning environment that would help create an R-mode to L-mode flow, in this case, specifically for foreign language training.
In the years since, many educators have seized this idea of leveraging the R-mode for its acquisition capabilities.5 As with any exciting new technique, some folks took it too far in one direction and advocated pure R-mode techniques that completely ignored the L-mode.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW its not a one-way trip; you need to return to R-mode to keep the ideas flowing.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW Shitty First Drafts Part of being comfortable with uncertainty means being comfortable with something thats incomplete and unfinished.
In her book Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life, Lamott explains the dangers of perfectionism: Perfectionism is the voice of the oppressor, the enemy of the people.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW One of the more effectiveand controversialpractices espoused by Extreme Programming is pair programming.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW this case, the well-known computer-science parity rule) and who hadnt.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW an invented word that tries to go beyond the binary notion of yes and no.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW System Metaphor The original published version of Extreme Programming (described in Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change [Bec00]) featured a fascinating practice: system metaphor.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW We use metaphors so much that were not even aware of many of them (as with windows, mice, and so on).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E NGAGE AN R- MODE TO L- MODE F LOW Or the all-time classic line from Henny Youngman: Take my wife.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES Figure 4.3: Elias Howes patent The R-mode has to throw it over the fence visually, in this case wrapped up in the disturbingand very memorableimagery of an outlandish dream.
Image streaming is a technique designed to help harvest R-mode imagery.13 The basic idea is to deliberately observe mental imagery: pay close attention to it, and work it around in your mind a bit.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES For each image that crosses your mind, do the following: 1.
Sometimes the material is relatively dullwhat the weather was doing, how the prices at the market were up, how the scullery maid ran off with the stable boy, and so Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES Tools and Interference When you try to start any creative endeavor, such as writing on a blog, an article, or (heaven help you) a full-length book, you will encounter massive resistance.
Resistance can take many forms, from niggling self-doubt to wildly creative procrastination to a myriad assortment of other distractions and excuses (see The War of Art: Break Through the Blocks and Win Your Inner Creative Battles [Pre02] for a disturbingly complete catalog of the many manifestations of resistance).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES But there are many ways to write your thoughts down, and some are more effective for our purposes than others.
The Morning Pages Technique This is a technique that I first heard about in the context of a writers workshop (also described in The Artists Way [Cam02]); its a common technique for authors.
He knew that just Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES as he started to drift off into sleep, his subconscious mind would take up the challenge of his problem and provide a solution.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES Figure 4.4: Grace Cathedral, San Francisco A labyrinth is not a puzzle; its a tool for meditation.
But you dont have to start washing a lot of Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVEST R- MODE C UES dishes or compulsively mowing your yard in order to take advantage of this effect.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVESTING P ATTERNS You have to sort of defocus a bit.
Letter Position in Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Word Recognition [Raw76] and Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVESTING P ATTERNS Using Martial Arts to Improve Focus June Kim tells us the following story: After beginning martial arts, I recognized that my focus span (the period of time I can keep focusing on something) and control (such as getting focused in a poor environment) has improved.
The indented code makes it nice and readable, but thats not how the compiler sees it: Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVESTING P ATTERNS only the first statement binds to the else; the indention is misleading.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARVESTING P ATTERNS Necessity is the mother of invention.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) G ET I T R IGHT Although using a functional shift will create a brain burst in your readers, it will likely cause agita (that is, dyspepsia of the soul) on the part of ones copy editor.
The operators removed the bug, dutifully taped it to the log book, and so truly debugged the system.2 This is pretty well-worn territory; see, for example, The Power of Intuition: How to Use Your Gut Feelings to Make Better Decisions at Work [Kle04].
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M EET Y OUR C OGNITIVE B IASES  Personality tendencies: How your personality influences your thoughts  Hardware bugs: How older portions of your brain can override the smarter portions Being aware of these bugs is the first step to mitigating them.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M EET Y OUR C OGNITIVE B IASES Need for closure We are not comfortable with doubt and uncertaintyso much so that well go to great lengths to resolve open issues and to remove uncertainty and reach closure.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M EET Y OUR C OGNITIVE B IASES Named for Plato, these ideal forms supply a sort of universal, commonly understood set of building blocks.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M EET Y OUR C OGNITIVE B IASES Correlation vs. Causation Scientific studies can be easily misinterpreted; most of us are not well versed in the science of statistical analysis.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M EET Y OUR C OGNITIVE B IASES Rarely Doesnt Mean Never Astronomically unlikely coincidences happen daily.6 Recently, weve witnessed all manner of devastation from 500-year floods to 100-year storms, but geologically speaking thats just a drop in the bucketthese events are not that rare.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY Weve looked at cognitive biases so far in a sort of static light.
You and the rest of your cohort are united by shared memories, common habits, and popular styles, as well as your age and station Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY in life at that time.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY The GI Generation, 19011924 This generation produced the first Miss America and propagated the idea of the all-American athlete.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY Generation X, 19611981 One of the best descriptions Ive read of Gen X described them as being raised Gen X is the greatest by wolves.
Even though it was early in my Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY career, I had significant skills in Unix that my peers did not, and so this fellow sawand adopteda kindred spirit.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY Technology and Generations A few years ago, a babysitter we had hired gazed in wonder at our kitchen phone.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY Figure 5.3: Howe/Strauss generational archetypes According to the Howe and Strauss model, I am among the eldest of Generation X, on the cusp of the Boomers.14 I tend to identify with the theoretical Gen X characteristics, especially survivalism, pragmatism, and realism.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R ECOGNIZE Y OUR G ENERATIONAL A FFINITY it is clearly better to take a pragmatic approach, as an X-er.
Its based on the work of Carl Jung and categorizes your tendencies along four independent axes.15 According to the MBTI, you fall somewhere on the line for each dimension, and you get a letter depending on which way you lean.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C ODIFYING Y OUR P ERSONALITY T ENDENCIES Depending on which side of the fence you fall on any axis, you get that letter.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E XPOSING H ARDWARE B UGS If it hurts, hiss Dont bother to fix the problem, but spend all your energy fixing the blame on someone instead.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E XPOSING H ARDWARE B UGS A Heaven or a Hell As well see later in Section 7.6, Imagination Overrides Senses, on page 212, you can physically rewire your brain depending on the thoughts you think.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OW I D ON  T K NOW W HAT TO T HINK You know what it feels like to have that rush of intense feeling come upwhen the boss sends you a snippy email or that rude driver cuts you off to exit without signaling.
Theres some evidence that simply smiling can be as effective as antidepressant medications.19 5.5 Now I Dont Know What to Think The fact that we live at the bottom of a deep gravity well, on the surface of a gas-covered planet going around a nuclear fireball 90 million miles away and think this to be normal is obviously some indication of how skewed our perspective tends to be.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OW I D ON  T K NOW W HAT TO T HINK Remember back in the discussion on learning, when I said you want to create an R-mode to L-mode flow?
Do what you need to do to prove that your idea is a good one, because your intuition may have been wrong.20 Feedback is the key to agile software development for precisely this reason: software development depends on people.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OW I D ON  T K NOW W HAT TO T HINK To help get a bigger picture perspective and test your understanding and mental How do you know?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) N OW I D ON  T K NOW W HAT TO T HINK the global apocalypse was scheduled for tomorrow (live coverage at 10 a.m. Eastern/7 a.m. Mountain and Pacific).
Henri Poincar Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) The mind is not a vessel to be filled, but a fire to be kindled.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) W HAT L EARNING I S ... AND I SN  T Figure 6.1: Sheep dip: alien, toxic, and temporary in an alien environment, devoid of any connection to their day-today world, and then proclaim them to be Java developers, .NET developers, or what have you.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) W HAT L EARNING I S ... AND I SN  T Ignite Your Own Fire We must encourage [each other]once we have grasped the basic pointsto interconnecting everything else on our own, to use memory to guide our original thinking, and to accept what someone else says as a starting point, a seed to be nourished and grow.
Suppose someone were to go and ask his neighbors for fire and find a substantial blaze there, and just stay there continually warming himself: that is no different from someone who goes to someone else to get to some of his rationality, and fails to realize that he ought to ignite his own flame, his own intellect, but is happy to sit entranced by the lecture, and the words trigger only associative thinking and bring, as it were, only a flush to his cheeks and a glow to his limbs; but he has not dispelled or dispersed, in the warm light of philosophy, the internal dank gloom of his mind.
Plutarch, Greek historian, biographer, and essayist As Plutarch pointed out in the epigraph that opened this chapter, the mind is not a vessel to be filled but a fire to be kindledyour own fire.
Goals are great things, and you may have many of them: lose weight, find a better job, move to a bigger house (or a smaller one), write that novel, learn to play the electric guitar, write a killer Rails application, or learn all about Erlang.
Johanna Rothman Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C REATE A P RAGMATIC I NVESTMENT P LAN So in addition to looking at goals through a local lens, consider the impact they may have in the larger context of your work and life.
The expression to make time for is a bit of a misnomer; time cant be Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C REATE A P RAGMATIC I NVESTMENT P LAN created or destroyed.
PIP: Diversify When choosing areas to invest in, you need to make a conscious effort to diversify your attentiondont have all your eggs in one Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C REATE A P RAGMATIC I NVESTMENT P LAN basket.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) C REATE A P RAGMATIC I NVESTMENT P LAN PIP: Active, Not Passive, Investment Another main topic from The Pragmatic Programmer is the idea of feedback.
For example, if I wanted to learn the FXRuby GUI toolkit, Id be sure to get the book first, download the components I need, and Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE Y OUR P RIMARY L EARNING M ODE Figure 6.2: Obligatory diagram for visual learners have an idea for something I want to write using FXRuby before sitting down and working with it in earnest.
Because everyone is wired differently, some ways of learning will be more effective for you than Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE Y OUR P RIMARY L EARNING M ODE others, so you need to figure out the most efficient way for you to assimilate new information.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE Y OUR P RIMARY L EARNING M ODE Visual admire appear attractive blurred bright clear cloudy colorful conceal dark dawn disappear display envision exhibit expose eyed faced flash focus foggy foresee form gaze glance glare gleam glow graphic hazy illuminate imagine obscure observe look peer perspective picture preview reflect watch reveal scan see shiny show sight sightsee sparkle spy staring strobe surface twinkle vanish veil view visualize view vivid Verbal Kinesthetic announce answer argue asked attune call chatter cheer complain crescendo cry deaf discuss echo explain expression growl grumble gurgling harmonize harsh hear hum inquire insult lecture listen loud melodious mention mumble noisy outspoken overtones question quiet recite reply request resonance sang shout shriek shrill sighs silences silent sound(s) stammer talk tell translate unhearing utter vocal yell angle beat bends bounce break brush burdened carry clumsy comfortable concrete crouching crumble exciting feel firm fits flop force grab grapple grasps grinds hard hold hug hurt impression irritate mushy movement pinch plush pressure pull rub run scramble scrape shaky skip slip smooth soft solid spike stuffed suffer sweep thick touch trample tremble twist unbudging unfeeling warm wash weigh work Figure 6.3: Representative system predicates Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE Y OUR P RIMARY L EARNING M ODE differently.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE Y OUR P RIMARY L EARNING M ODE Visual/Spatial Using diagrams/plans, sketching, painting, manipulating images Musical Playing music, recognizing sounds, rhythms, patterns, remembering slogans and verses Interpersonal Empathic; senses feelings, intentions, and motivations of others Intrapersonal Self-reflective; works from an understanding of inner feelings, dreams, and relations with others Other researchers proposed additional intelligences as time went on, but even with this original set you can begin to appreciate some interesting abilities.
And these differences arent necessarily cast in stone; for instance, you may find that practicing the techniques in this book changes the effectiveness of different ways of learning for you.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE Y OUR P RIMARY L EARNING M ODE Personality Types If you google around, youll find various online surveys and quizzes that will help you identify what sort of learner you are (or at least, where your tendencies lie).
In fact, some methods of determining your learning style tie in to your personality, using the dimensions of personality popularized by Carl Jung and later enshrined in the Myers Briggs Type Indicator (as we saw in Section 5.3, Codifying Your Personality Tendencies, on page 144).
Malcolm Knowles, in The Adult Learner: a Neglected Species [Kno90], identifies these characteristics of the adult learner and their learning environment:  The adult learner is motivated to learn if learning will satisfy their own interests and needs.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) U SE E NHANCED L EARNING T ECHNIQUES In the meeting itself, plan on spending the first half hour eating, socializing, and in informal conversation.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R EAD D ELIBERATELY WITH SQ3R 6.7 Read Deliberately with SQ3R Its an unfortunate truth that written instructions are generally considered to be Written instruction is the the least efficient.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R EAD D ELIBERATELY WITH SQ3R The first helpful aspect of this technique is that it is deliberate.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R EAD D ELIBERATELY WITH SQ3R An Example For example, suppose Im reading a book on a new programming languageD, Erlang, or Ruby, for example.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) R EAD D ELIBERATELY WITH SQ3R Test-Driven Learning Reading the same material over and over, or studying the same notes over and over, doesnt help you remember the material.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) V ISUALIZE I NSIGHT WITH M IND M APS 6.8 Visualize Insight with Mind Maps A mind map is a kind of a diagram that shows topics and how they are connected.
Invented by British author Tony Buzan in The Mind Map Book: How to Use Radiant Thinking to Maximize Your Brains Untapped Potential [BB96], similar styles of diagrams have been around since at least the third century.12 A modern mind map is a sort of two-dimensional, organic, and holistic outline.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) V ISUALIZE I NSIGHT WITH M IND M APS Figure 6.4: Original Dreyfus mind mapmessy, organic When creating a mind map, avoid filling in the elements in a clockwise mannerthats just an outline going in circles.13 When I give lectures on this topic, I usually stop here and ask the audience whether they have ever heard of, or used, mind maps.
Spatial cueing conveys information to you in a way that linear words or an outline cant; the addition of color and symbols adds to the richness of the representation.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) V ISUALIZE I NSIGHT WITH M IND M APS an insight to the mind map, you are faced with the question, where does this belong?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) V ISUALIZE I NSIGHT WITH M IND M APS Figure 6.6: Affinity grouping in progress Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARNESS THE R EAL P OWER OF D OCUMENTING Since the sticky notes let you detach and reapply, you can reposition the notes as needed.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H ARNESS THE R EAL P OWER OF D OCUMENTING but they use a pragmatic filter to make sure the investment in creating any documentation is really worth the effort.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN BY T EACHING As I mentioned earlier (in Section 6.8, Visualize Insight with Mind Maps, on page 181), taking notes seems to be very important, even if you never read them again.
Having to go back to the well while preparing to teach, and Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) T AKE I T TO THE S TREETS while having to think on your feet to respond to questions, all helps strengthen your neural connections.
But all this learning is only part of the equation; next we need to look at putting learning into action and see the best ways to gain experience.
In the meanwhile, its time to begin to take it to the streetsto leave the relatively safe cloisters of the cubicle and begin to interact with the world to advance your personal learning.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) We should be careful to get out of an experience only the wisdom that is in it and stop there; lest we be like the cat that sits on a hot stove-lid; he will never sit on a hot stove-lid againand that is well; but also he will never sit on a cold one anymore.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen P LAY IN O RDER TO L EARN We seem to have a cultural tendency to put the cart before the horse: you struggle to shovel in information first and then hope to maybe use it later.
Papert is perhaps the leading expert on using technology to create new ways of learning.1 He invented the programming language Logo: a toy that children could play with and, in the playing, learn deep mathematical concepts.
Were not really designed to just receive information but rather to explore and build mental models on our Papert and Marvin Minsky founded the Artificial Intelligence Lab at MIT; he also was one of the founders of the famed MIT Media Lab.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) P LAY IN O RDER TO L EARN Smart People and Dumb People I think most people are a lot more capable than they give themselves credit for.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EVERAGE E XISTING K NOWLEDGE For example, you could create a board game that simulates visitors to a website.
I mentioned using Lego blocks for design back in Chapter 4, Get in Your Right Mind, on page 85 for the same reason: the idea is to engage as much of your entire being in the learning process: verbal, visual, musical, numerical, gross-motor body movement, fine-motor finger movement, and so on.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EVERAGE E XISTING K NOWLEDGE Problem Solving with George Plya To solve a problem, ask yourself these questions:  What are the unknown aspects?
George Plya wrote a very influential book on concrete steps to problem solving that covers these and other classic techniques (How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method [PC85]; see the sidebar on the current page for a brief synopsis).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E MBED F AILING IN P RACTICE The danger lies in not completing the transition and sticking with the hybridized approach instead of fully embracing the new skill.
You need the support Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E MBED F AILING IN P RACTICE of a good learning environment so you can more easily gain and apply experience from both your failures and your successes.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E MBED F AILING IN P RACTICE That wouldnt be safe; a live and unsuspecting patient is not the right context for experimentation.
Reproduce any work product as of any time Backtracking to a previous version of the source code isnt quite enough; you probably need to actually run the program (or work with any derivative work product) as of any point in history.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) E MBED F AILING IN P RACTICE In software development, its pretty simple to set up an infrastructure to address these needs.
Automation ties it all together and ensures that the trivial mechanics are taken care of in a reliable, repeatable manner.7 This Starter Kit gives you the advantage of freedom to experiment, with comparatively little risk.
Thich Nhat Hahn In fact, Dave Thomas and I felt that the idea of the Starter Kit was so important that those were the very first books we published as the Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN A BOUT THE I NNER G AME Next Actions 2 If your software project isnt set up with a safety net (version control, unit testing, and automation), you need to get that implemented right away.
Understanding the inner game will help you eliminate interference that gets in the way of learning, and it emphasizes the right kind of feedback to help you learn.
In this series of books, Timothy Gallwey and other authors differentiate the obvious, outer game that you are engaged in and explore the subtleties of the more critical inner game.
In a famous example, the author takes an older subject, a woman in her late fifties or so, who has never played tennis or indeed Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN A BOUT THE I NNER G AME engaged in any significant physical activity for the past twenty years.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN A BOUT THE I NNER G AME Cultivate Situational Feedback Situational feedback is the primary inner game technique that allows you to learn more efficiently by eliminating any interference.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN A BOUT THE I NNER G AME The author had been teaching in a manner similar to the ski instructor: hold your elbow this way, your head like this, lean that way, now play comfortably.
Performing music, for instance, has been shown by functional MRI scans to activate virtually every center in the brain.10 From operating the instrument to reading the notes, listening to the other musicians, following the abstract principles of chord progression and such, both L-mode and R-mode are active and cooperating along with lower-level muscle memory.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN A BOUT THE I NNER G AME a string bass, the lessons can be applied to software development and other endeavors as well.
What can Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I MAGINATION O VERRIDES S ENSES you do to increase your chances of success in challenging environments such as these?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I MAGINATION O VERRIDES S ENSES Much of perception is based on prediction,15 and prediction is based on context and past experience, so much so that current, real-time input takes a backseat.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN I T LIKE AN E XPER T Swimmers do this by being attached to a rope and pulled through the water at high speed.20 Before a swimmer can achieve that sort of speed on their own, they get to experience what it will feel like.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) L EARN I T LIKE AN E XPER T In this chapter, weve looked at the value of playing to facilitate learning and the importance of actively embedding failure as an essential part of practice.
In this part of the book, we are going to look at how to better manage your mind along these three axes:  Increasing focus and attention  Managing your knowledge  Optimizing your current context Attention is the act of focusing in on an area of interest.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I NCREASE F OCUS AND A TTENTION If you can miss obvious thingslike a knife sticking out of your neckjust think what else might be going on around you that has escaped your attention.
Paul Graham, in his book Hackers and Painters: Big Ideas from the Computer Age [Gra04], suggests that a navy pilot can land a 40,000 lb aircraft at 140mph on a pitching Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I NCREASE F OCUS AND A TTENTION carrier deck at night more safely than the average teenager can cut a bagel.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I NCREASE F OCUS AND A TTENTION In this style of meditation, all you have to do is pay attention to your breath.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) I NCREASE F OCUS AND A TTENTION After spending some time like this, you can try deliberately controlling your breath.
This kind of critical thinking time is generally unrecognized and unPrepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D EFOCUS TO F OCUS rewarded in most corporations.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) D EFOCUS TO F OCUS Procrastination vs. Marinating How can you tell the difference between stewing thoughts in a marinade vs. time-sucking procrastination?
He continues, This stream of contents is only rather like a narrative because of its multiplicity; at any point in time there are multiple drafts of narrative fragments at various stages of editing in various places in the brain.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE Lets return to the idea of marinating; as hard as it might be to accept, you need time to allow these multiple drafts to ferment, percolate, and develop.
Have you heard of the consultants Rule of Three?7 In general, if you cant think of three ways a plan can go wrong or think of three different solutions to a problem, then you havent thought it through enough.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE Thomas Jefferson owned somewhere in the neighborhood of 10,000 books in his lifetime.8 Jefferson was an avid reader, and these books ranged on topics from political philosophy to music to agriculture to wine making.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE Figure 8.1: Displaying a wiki page You create a new page by first creating a link to it, using a WikiWord.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE Figure 8.2: Editing a wiki page You can use a wiki implemented in your favorite text editora wikiediting mode.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE The result is a portable wiki-in-my-pocket that is versioned and synchronized with my desktop and my laptop.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE Y OUR K NOWLEDGE Figure 8.3: Wiki notes For example, take a look at the screenshot in Figure 8.3.
And again, you can go off and mind map some of the more interesting bits to gain insight and bring that back to the wiki.
8.4 Optimize Your Current Context Context, in the sense well talk about it here, is the set of information that is currently loaded into your short-term memory related to the task at hand.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) O PTIMIZE Y OUR C URRENT C ONTEXT Context Switching How much disposable attention do you have?10 That is, how many things are currently demanding your attention, and how many total things can you possibly pay attention to at any given point in time?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) O PTIMIZE Y OUR C URRENT C ONTEXT A Problem of Organization You may have already experienced this problem with email: if you keep separate folders for various topics, what do you do with an email that cuts across the categories you use?
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) O PTIMIZE Y OUR C URRENT C ONTEXT Figure 8.4: Relative IQ point loss This makes me wonder if companies should focus less on mandatory drug testing and perhaps instead concentrate on mandatory email-habit testing.13 But of course its not just about email and drugs; drivers conversing on cell phones cannot respond quickly to highway hazards, either.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) O PTIMIZE Y OUR C URRENT C ONTEXT Deliberate Switching One way to help fight this is to approach context switching more deliberately (notice a trend here?).
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) O PTIMIZE Y OUR C URRENT C ONTEXT For instance, I have it rigged so that with just a few keystrokes I can send a one-line email message to someone in my address book.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE I NTERRUPTIONS D ELIBERATELY He supplies a methodology and a lot of tips and tricks (who knew a labeler could be so much fun) to help you be more efficient at plowing through tasks.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE I NTERRUPTIONS D ELIBERATELY Figure 8.5: A maze of twisty little passages, all alike The Net offers the widest assortment of distraction in history.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE I NTERRUPTIONS D ELIBERATELY Beware of Email Apnea In February 2008, Linda Stone coined the term email apnea.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE I NTERRUPTIONS D ELIBERATELY of thought and a minimum of twenty to thirty minutes lost productivity once you try to get back into it, if you even get a chance to get back to it today.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) M ANAGE I NTERRUPTIONS D ELIBERATELY Put a sign on your cube during a debugging session, or close the door if you have one.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) K EEP A B IG E NOUGH C ONTEXT 8.6 Keep a Big Enough Context The more you can keep information in context, the better.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) K EEP A B IG E NOUGH C ONTEXT Figure 8.6: Mac OS X Spaces Just as an example, here is how I usually have my workspaces set up now (see Figure 8.6): Communications: I use this workspace for any communication, scheduling, or planning-related task, with the following windows.
TextMate (editor)  Dictionary/Thesaurus  OmniGraffle (diagram editor)  Acrobat Reader (for proofing) Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) K EEP A B IG E NOUGH C ONTEXT Coding: This is the same idea as writing but with different tools.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) H OW TO S TAY S HARP 8.7 How to Stay Sharp In this chapter, weve looked at a lot of issues around the idea of focus and attention.
I have encouraged you to pursue meditation as a tool for mental sharpness and clarity, extolled the virtues of maintaining an exocortex, and warned against the dangers of distraction.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) The real voyage of discovery consists not in seeking new landscapes, but in having new eyes.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) W HAT TO D O T OMORROW M ORNING to believe that change is possible.
Prepared exclusively for Edwin Chen Report erratum this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2008) B EYOND E XPER TISE Ive seen a lot of this over the years.
In the novel The Girl with the Pearl Earring, the author describes a fictional account of the painter Vermeer and a serving girl who may have inspired one of Vermeers most well-known paintings (and the title of the book).
