CHAPTER 1 On Souls and Their Sizes Soul-Shards ONE gloomy day in early 1991, a couple of months after my father died, I was standing in the kitchen of my parents house, and my mother, looking at a sweet and touching photograph of my father taken perhaps fifteen years earlier, said to me, with a note of despair, What meaning does that photograph have?
None at all.
Its just a flat piece of paper with dark spots on it here and there.
Its useless. The bleakness of my mothers grief-drenched remark set my head spinning because I knew instinctively that I disagreed with her, but I did not quite know how to express to her the way I felt the photograph should be considered.
After a few minutes of emotional pondering  soul-searching, quite literally  I hit upon an analogy that I felt could convey to my mother my point of view, and which I hoped might lend her at least a tiny degree of consolation.
What I said to her was along the following lines.
In the living room we have a book of the Chopin tudes for piano.
All of its pages are just pieces of paper with dark marks on them, just as two-dimensional and flat and foldable as the photograph of Dad  and yet, think of the powerful effect that they have had on people all over the world for 150 years now.
Thanks to those black marks on those flat sheets of paper, untold thousands of people have collectively spent millions of hours moving their fingers over the keyboards of pianos in complicated patterns, producing sounds that give them indescribable pleasure and a sense of great meaning.
Those pianists in turn have conveyed to many millions of listeners, including you and me, the profound emotions that churned in Frdric Chopins heart, thus affording all of us some partial access to Chopins interiority  to the experience of living in the head, or rather the soul, of Frdric Chopin.
The marks on those sheets of paper are no less than soul-shards  scattered remnants of the shattered soul of Frdric Chopin.
Each of those strange geometries of notes has a unique power to bring back to life, inside our brains, some tiny fragment of the internal experiences of another human being  his sufferings, his joys, his deepest passions and tensions  and we thereby know, at least in part, what it was like to be that human being, and many people feel intense love for him.
In just as potent a fashion, looking at that photograph of Dad brings back, to us who knew him intimately, the clearest memory of his smile and his gentleness, activates inside our living brains some of the most central representations of him that survive in us, makes little fragments of his soul dance again, but in the medium of brains other than his own.
Like the score to a Chopin tude, that photograph is a soul-shard of someone departed, and it is something we should cherish as long as we live. Although the above is a bit more flowery than what I said to my mother, it gives the essence of my message.
I dont know what effect it had on her feelings about the picture, but that photo is still there, on a counter in her kitchen, and every time I look at it, I remember that exchange.
What Is It Like to Be a Tomato?
I slice up and devour tomatoes without the slightest sense of guilt.
I do not go to bed uneasily after having consumed a fresh tomato.
It does not occur to me to ask myself which tomato I ate, or whether by eating it I have snuffed an inner light, nor do I believe it is meaningful to try to imagine how the tomato felt as it was sitting on my plate being sliced apart.
To me, a tomato is a desireless, soulless, nonconscious entity, and I have no qualms about doing with its body as I like.
Indeed, a tomato is nothing but its body.
There is no mindbody problem for tomatoes.
(I hope, dear reader, that we agree on this much!)
I also swat mosquitoes without a qualm, though I try to avoid stepping on ants, and when there is an insect other than a mosquito in the house, I usually try to capture it and carry it outside, where I let it go unharmed.
I eat chicken and fish sometimes [Note: This is no longer the case  see the Post Scriptum to this chapter], but many years ago I stopped eating the flesh of mammals.
No beef, no ham, no bacon, no spam, no pork, no lamb  no thank you, maam!
Mind you, I would still enjoy the taste of a BLT or well-done burger, but for moral reasons, I simply dont partake of them.
I dont want to go on a crusade here, but I do need to talk a little bit about my vegetarian leanings, because they have everything to do with souls.
Guinea Pig When I was fifteen, I had a summer job punching buttons on a Friden mechanical calculator in a physiology lab at Stanford University.
(This was back in those days when there was but one computer on the whole Stanford campus and few scientists even knew of its existence, let alone thought about using it for their calculations.)
It was pretty grueling work to do such number-punching for hours on end, and one day, Nancy, the graduate student for whose research project I was doing all this, asked me if, for relief, Id like to try my hand at other kinds of tasks around the lab.
I said Sure!, and so that afternoon she escorted me up to the fourth floor of the physiology building and showed me the cages where they kept the animals  literally guinea pigs  that they used in their experiments.
I still remember the pungent smell and the scurrying-about of all those little orange-furred rodents.
The next afternoon, Nancy asked me if I would please go up to the top floor and bring down two animals for her next round of experiments.
I didnt have a chance to reply, however, for no sooner had I started to imagine myself reaching into one of those cages and selecting two small soft furry beings to be snuffed than my head began spinning, and in a flash I fainted right away, banging my head on the concrete floor.
The next thing I knew, I was looking up into the face of the labs director, George Feigen, a dear old family friend, who was deeply concerned that I might have injured myself in the fall.
Luckily I was fine, and I slowly stood up and then rode my bike home for the rest of the day.
Nobody ever asked me again to pick animals to be sacrificed for the sake of science.
Pig Oddly enough, despite that extremely troubling head-on encounter with the concept of taking the life of a living creature, I kept on eating hamburgers and other kinds of meat for several years.
I dont think I thought about it very much, since none of my friends did, and certainly no one talked about it.
Meat-eating was just a background fact in the life of everyone I knew.
Moreover, I admit with shame that in my mind, back in those days, the word vegetarian conjured up an image of weird, sternly moralistic nutcases (the movie The Seven Year Itch has a terrific scene in a vegetarian restaurant in Manhattan that conveys this stereotype to a tee).
But one day when I was twenty-one, I read a short story called Pig by the NorwegianEnglish writer Roald Dahl, and this story had a profound effect on my life  and through me, on the lives of other creatures as well.
Pig starts off lightly and amusingly  a nave young man named Lexington, raised as a strict vegetarian by his Aunt Glosspan (Pangloss reversed), discovers after her death that he loves the taste of meat (though he doesnt know what it is that hes eating).
Soon, as in all Dahl stories, things take weird twists.
Driven by curiosity about this tasty substance called pork, Lexington, on the recommendation of a new friend, decides to take a tour of a slaughterhouse.
We join him as he sits in the waiting room with other tourists.
He idly watches as various waiting parties are called, one by one, to take their tours.
Eventually, Lexingtons turn comes, and he is escorted from the waiting room into the shackling area where he watches pigs being hoisted by their back legs onto hooks on a moving chain, getting their throats slit, and, with blood gushing out, proceeding head downwards down the disassembly line to fall into a cauldron of boiling water where their body hair is removed, after which their heads and limbs are chopped off and they are prepared for being gutted and sent off, in neat little cellophane-wrapped packages, to supermarkets all over the country, where they will sit in glass cases, along with other rose-colored rivals, waiting for purchasers to admire them and hopefully to select them to take home.
As he is observing all this with detached fascination, Lexington himself is suddenly yanked by the leg and flipped upside down, and he realizes that he too is now dangling from the moving chain, just like the pigs hes been watching.
His placidity all gone, he yells out, There has been a frightful mistake!, but the workers ignore his cries.
Soon the chain pulls him alongside a friendly-looking chap who Lexington hopes will grasp the situations absurdity, but instead, the gentle sticker grasps Lexingtons ear, pulls the dangling lad a bit closer, and then, smiling at him with lovingkindness, deftly slits the boys jugular vein wide open with a razor-sharp knifeblade.
As young Lexington continues his unanticipated inverted journey, his powerful heart pumps his blood out of his throat and onto the concrete floor, and even though he is upside down and losing awareness rapidly, he dimly perceives the pigs ahead of him dropping, one by one, into the steaming cauldron.
One of them, oddly enough, seems to have white gloves on its two front trotters, and he is reminded of the glove-clad young woman who had just preceded him from the waiting room into the tour area.
And with that curious final thought, Lexington woozily slips out of this, the best of all possible worlds, into the next.
The closing scene of Pig reverberated in my head for a long time.
In my mind, I kept on flipping back and forth between being an upsidedown oinking pig on a hook and being Lexington, spilling into the cauldron Revulsion, Revelation, Revolution A month or two after reading this haunting story, I accompanied my parents and my sister Laura to the city of Cagliari, at the southern end of the rugged island of Sardinia, where my father was participating in a physics conference.
To wind up the meeting in grand local style, the organizers had planned a sumptuous banquet in a park on the outskirts of Cagliari, in which a suckling piglet was to be roasted and then sliced apart in front of all the diners.
As honored guests of the conference, we were all expected to take part in this venerated Sardinian tradition.
I, however, was deeply under the influence of the Dahl story I had recently read, and I simply could not envision participating in such a ritual.
In my new frame of mind, I couldnt even imagine how anybody could wish to be there, let alone partake of the piglets body.
It turned out that my sister Laura was also horrified by the prospect, and so the two of us stayed behind in our hotel and were very happy to eat some pasta and vegetables.
The onetwo punch of the Norwegian Pig and the Sardinian piglet resulted in my following my sisters lead in completely giving up meateating.
I also refused to buy leather shoes or belts.
Soon I became a fervent proselytizer for my new credo, and I remember how gratified I was that I managed to sway a couple of my friends for a few months, although to my disappointment, they gradually gave up on it.
In those days, I often wondered how some of my personal idols  Albert Einstein, for instance  could have been meat-eaters.
I found no explanation, although recently, to my great pleasure, a Web search yielded hints that Einsteins sympathies were, in fact, toward vegetarianism, and not for health reasons but out of compassion towards living beings.
