Several years passed this way, almost as if I had never had any epiphany, but then one day, when I was a beginning assistant professor at Indiana University, I met a highly thoughtful woman who had adopted the same vegetarian philosophy as I once had, and had done so for similar reasons, but she had stuck to it for a longer time than I had.
Quite rightly, he is saying that the piece is majestic and noble, but more controversially, he is drawing a dividing line between different levels or sizes of human souls, suggesting that some people are simply not up to playing this piece, not because of any physical limitations of their bodies, but because their souls are not large enough.
Small-souled and Large-souled Humans Some of us believe in capital punishment  the intentional public squelching of a human soul, no matter how ardently that soul would plead for mercy, would tremble, would shake, would shriek, would desperately struggle to escape, on being led down the corridor to the site of their doom.
I would also argue that most peoples largely unconscious prejudices about whether to eat or not to eat this or that food, whether to buy or not to buy this or that article of clothing, whether to swat or not to swat this or that insect, whether to root or not to root for this or that species of robot in a sci-fi film, whether to be sad or not to be sad if a human character in a film or a novel meets with a violent end, whether to claim or not to claim that a particular senescent person is no longer there, and so forth, reflect precisely this kind of numerical continuum in their minds, whether they admit it or not.
The answer is, No, it does not.
Even though I sincerely believe there is much more of a soul in the twenty-year-old than in the two-year-old (a view that will no doubt dismay many readers), I nonetheless have enormous respect for the potential of the two-year-old to develop a much larger soul over the course of a dozen or so years.
Thinkodynamics and Statistical Mentalics It thus comes as no news to anyone that different levels of description have different kinds of utility, depending on the purpose and the context, and I have accordingly summarized my view of this simple truth as it applies to the world of thinking and the brain: Thinkodynamics is explained by statistical mentalics, as well as its flipped-around version: Statistical mentalics can be bypassed by talking at the level of thinkodynamics.
What do I mean by these two terms, thinkodynamics and statistical mentalics?
So I ask: Who shoves whom around inside the domino chainium?
Of course this image is far-fetched, but remember that the careenium is merely intended as a useful metaphor for understanding our brains, and the fact is that our brains, too, are rather far-fetched, in the sense that they too contain tiny events (neuron firings) and larger events (patterns of neuron firings), and the latter presumably somehow have representational qualities, allowing us to register and also to remember things that happen outside of our crania.
Taking the Reductionistic View of the Careenium The first inclination of a modern physicist who heard this story might be reductionistic, in the sense of pooh-poohing the large simmballs as mere epiphenomena, meaning that although they are undeniably there, they are not essential to an understanding of the system, since they are composed of simms.
After all, we ourselves are pretty big epiphenomena, and as Ive already observed many times in this book, this fact dooms us to talking about the world in terms of other epiphenomena at about our size level (e.g., our mothers and fathers, our cats and cars and cakes, our sailboats and saxophones and sassafras trees).
(The colloidal particles here play the role of simmballs, and the water molecules play the role of simms.)
We were escorted to an area of the store that had several TV screens on a shelf, and a video camera was plugged into the back of one of them, thus allowing us to see what the camera was looking at and to gauge its color accuracy and such things.
But then, inevitably, I felt compelled to try pointing the camera at the TV screen itself.
CHAPTER 5 On Video Feedback Two Video Voyages, Three Decades Apart THE loop of video feedback is rich, as I found out in my first explorations with our familys new video camera in the mid-1970s.
I made an appointment at the Stanford University television studios, and upon arriving I found that the very friendly fellow there had already set up a TV and a camera on a tripod for me to play around with.
It was a piece of cake to point the camera at the screen, zoom in and out, tilt the camera, change angles, regulate brightness and contrast, and so on.
It is no more surprising than the fact that audio feedback can take place or that a TV camera can be pointed at a screen to which its image is being sent.
The next stage, obviously, is where the leash is sufficiently long and flexible that the video camera can point straight at the center of the screen.
Can the camera tilt or not, and if so, by how much?
Is there some way for the video camera itself to appear on the screen?
In general, one would think that the larger the number, the longer any description of it would have to be, but it all depends on how easily the number is expressible in terms of landmark integers  those rare integers that have exceptionally short names or descriptions, such as ten to the trillion, with its extremely economic five-syllable description.
Since it always takes such a large number of syllables to describe it, we know that b must be a huge integer.
Is Church Latin a language?
Mathematical reasoning seemed to have been precisely characterized as the repeated use of certain basic rules of logic, dubbed rules of inference, such as modus ponens: If you have proven a result X and you have also proven X  Y (where the arrow represents the concept of implication, so that the line means If X is true, then Y is also true), then you can toss Y into the bin of proven results.
Prim Numbers Having realized that some hypothetical volume of the series by Whitehead and Russell could define and systematically explore the various numerical properties of wff numbers, Gdel pushed his analogy further and showed, with a good deal of fancy machinery but actually not very much conceptual difficulty, that there was an infinitely more interesting recursively defined class of whole numbers, which I shall here call prim numbers (whimsically saluting the title of the famous three tomes), and which are the numbers belonging to provable formulas of PM (i.e., theorems).
There is a crucial difference between wff numbers and prim numbers, which comes from the fact that the rules of inference of PM sometimes produce output strings that are shorter than their input strings.
Just as with squares, primes, F numbers, or wff numbers, there could once again be a hypothetical volume of the series of tomes by Whitehead and Russell in which prim numbers were defined and their mathematical properties studied.
So Quines Quip talks about itself, claiming of itself that it is a full sentence (which it surely is, even though it is built out of two subjectless sentence fragments, one in quote marks and one not).
The above sentence is neither fish nor fowl, for it is not a formula of Principia Mathematica but an English sentence, so of course it doesnt have a Gdel number and it couldnt possibly be a theorem (or a nontheorem) of PM.
And you might also try to remember that the little number k is the Gdel number of a formula fragment containing a variable x, analogous to a subjectless sentence fragment in quote marks, while the larger number g is the Gdel number of a complete sentence in PM notation, analogous to a complete sentence in English.
It is all too easy to forget that moths, flies, dogs, cats, neonates, television cameras, and other small-souled beings do not perceive a television screen as we do.
Now, now, I hear some voice protesting (but of course its not your voice), how on earth could you have really been talking about Whitehead and Russell and Principia Mathematica if the lines you wrote were not about them but about Y. Ted Enrustle and Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica and such things?
Something may have troubled you when you learned that Prince Hyppias famous line about the number g proclaims (via analogy) its own unpennability.
In the cases of both Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica and Principia Mathematica, we saw that a system carefully designed to talk only about numbers and not to talk about itself nonetheless ineluctably winds up talking about itself in a cagey fashion  and it does so precisely because of the chameleonic nature of numbers, which are so rich and complex that numerical patterns have the flexibility to mirror any other kind of pattern.
Just as it is no miracle that a video system can create a selfreferential loop, but rather a kind of obvious triviality due to the power of TV cameras (or, to put it more precisely, the immensely rich representational power of very large arrays of pixels), so too it is no miracle that Principia Mathematica (or any other comparable system) contains self-focused sentences like Gdels formula, for the system of integers, exactly like a TV camera (only more so!
At this point, just as he did for PM, Gdel would promptly create a new formula KH for Super-PM that said, The number h is not a super-prim number, and of course he would do it in such a way that h would be the Gdel number of KH itself.
In other words, the hole in PM (and in any other axiomatic system as rich as PM) is not due to some careless oversight by Russell and Whitehead but is simply an inevitable property of any system that is flexible enough to capture the chameleonic quality of whole numbers.
PM is rich enough to be able to turn around and point at itself, like a television camera pointing at the screen to which it is sending its image.
This is far too large a task for finite folks like us, and so we have to settle for a compromise, which is to look at things at a less inclusive, less detailed level, but (fortunately for us) a more insight-providing level, namely the informational level.
I Am My Brains Most Complex Symbol Like a careenium (and also like PM), a brain can be seen on at (at least) two levels  a low level involving very small physical processes (perhaps involving particles, perhaps involving neurons  take your pick), and a high level involving large structures selectively triggerable by perception, which in this book I have called symbols, and which are the structures in our brain that constitute our categories.
The new screen is then taken in by the camera and fed back in, and around and around it goes.
In Chapter 1, when I spoke of small souls and large souls, I said that this is not a black-and-white matter but one of degree.
(thanks to the incredibly spartan symbol repertoire of a mosquito brain, barely larger than the symbol repertoire of a flush toilet or a thermostat), and accordingly, I have no qualms about dismissing the idea of there being a strange loop of selfhood in as tiny and swattable a brain as that of a mosquito.
This would require the vehicle to have a full episodic memory of thousands of experiences it had had, as well as an episodic projectory (what it would expect to happen in its life, and what it would hope, and what it would fear), as well as an episodic subjunctory, detailing its thoughts about near misses it had had, and what would most likely have happened had things gone some other way.
The symbols in our brains truly do do that voodoo that they do so well, and they do it in the electrochemical soup of neural events.
Of course, in all this, you would have radically changed the Sanskrit language, carrying it forwards in time a few thousand years, but that is how languages always progress.
Since we all perceive and represent hundreds of other human beings at vastly differing levels of detail and fidelity inside our cranium, and since the most important facet of all of those human beings is their own sense of self, we inevitably mirror, and thus house, a large number of other strange loops inside our head.
Suppose two video cameras and two televisions are set up so that camera A feeds screen A and, far away from it, camera B feeds screen B.
Lets assume, as would seem natural, that camera A is closer to screen A than it is to screen B (and vice versa).
Then loop A will take up more space on screen A than does loop B, meaning more pixels, and so loop A will be reproduced with higher fidelity on screen A. Loop A will be large and fine-grained, loop B will be small and coarse-grained.
The difference is that camera A is feeding its image directly to screen A (and not screen B), while camera B is directly feeding screen B (and not screen A).
Universal Beings We human beings, too, are universal machines of a different sort: our neural hardware can copy arbitrary patterns, even if evolution never had any grand plan for this kind of representational universality to come about.
And yet, to reiterate the metaphor, since our camera and our screen are grainy, we cannot have as deep or as accurate a representation of people beloved to us as either our own self-representation or their own self-representation.
One time when I had returned to Bloomington, I realized I had made a serious typesetting mistake in one chapter, and so, in panic, I called up my friend Scott Kim, who also had been spending endless hours in the Imlac room, and I was hugely relieved to find him there.
Theres no claim that the act of copying is simultaneous or perfect or total  just that each person lives partially in the brain of the other, and that if the bandwidth were turned up more and more and more and still more, they would come to live more and more inside each other  until, in the limit, the sense of a clear boundary between them would slowly be dissolved, as it is for the two halves of a Twinwirld pairson (and even more so for a Siamese Twinwirld pairson).
They are the atoms of meaning out of which larger structures of meaning are built.
I say its closer to that answer rather than saying that it is that answer, because Parfits view, like mine in this book, is that these things that seem so black-and white to us actually come in shades of gray  its just that in ordinary circumstances, things are always so close to being pure black or white that any hints of grayness remain hidden from view, not only thanks to the obvious external fact that we all have separate physical brains housed in separate skulls, but also thanks to an extensive web of linguistic and cultural conventions that collectively and subliminally insist that we each are exactly one person (this is the caged-bird metaphor of Chapter 18, and its also the Cartesian Ego notion), and which implicitly discourage us from imagining any kind of blending, overlapping, or sharing of souls.
If switch after switch were thrown, converting Parfit more and more into Napoleon, at what stage would he  or rather, at what stage would this slowly morphing person  simply be Napoleon?
As I have already made clear, asking exactly where along the line the switchover would take place makes no sense from Parfits point of view, for what matters is psychological continuity ( i.e., proximity in that quasimathematical space of personalities or brains that I suggested a little while ago), and that is a feature that comes in all shades of gray.
In Parfits view, the Cartesian Ego of Napoleon is not indivisible, nor is that of Derek Parfit.
It implicitly suggests, once again, a sharp, black-and-white dichotomy between a set of hypothetical machines that think (such machines would merely think but would have no inner life) and a different set of hypothetical machines who think (these machines would have an inner life, and each one would be a particular someone).
All of these things survive at different levels in many people who, thanks to having interacted with him intimately over many years or decades, constitute his soular corona  his wife, his three children, and his many, many friends.
Imagine a philosophical school called liphosophy whose disciples, known as liphosophers, believe in an elusive  in fact, undetectable  and yet terribly important nonphysical quality called Leafpilishness (always with a capital L) and who also believe that there are certain special entities in our universe that are imbued with this happy quality.
I was naturally filled with gratification when the popularity of my book Gdel, Escher, Bach linked my name in some fashion in the musical community with that of Bach (this was a true honor), and in Bachs 300th birthyear, 1985, I had the pleasure of participating in several tricentennial celebrations, including a tiny one on his exact birthday that I organized in Ann Arbor for the members of a class I was teaching, plus a few friends, the highlight of which was the small firestorm unleashed when we lit all 300 candles on the giant birthday cake I had ordered.
So I would say that those who strike us as self-less are in fact very soul-full  that is, they house many other souls inside their own skulls/brains/minds/souls  and I dont think this sharing of mind-space diminishes their central core but enlarges and enriches it.
