Fast is often equated with easy and, in the context of language learning, easiness could lead some readers to evoke miraculous second-language concoctions administered by charming teachers to engaged and engaging classmates.
Usually, adults think of language learning in terms of people interacting with each other, either in a beautiful city or a romantic countryside, in situations ranging from gentle and friendly meetings to tantra-inspired gatherings.
While I set the goals and define the time frame, it is up to you to find the most promising road to achieve your goals and to develop the skills needed for an effort that is going to last months and sometimes years.
After that, you may decide that you have no time to learn a new language, but never again will you say that you have no talent for it.
After working at the University Hospitals in Bonn and Frankfurt, I published and edited a small number of books (www.HepatologyTextbook.com and www.InfluenzaReport.com, among others) and created a handful of medical websites, one of which  www.Amedeo.com  has had the chance to become a Web Classic.
I was fascinated to observe how new languages gradually entered my brain; to struggle with learning and forgetting; to feel the brain becoming saturated, craving for a break; and to discover how learning sometimes makes true quantum leaps, when sketchy pieces of knowledge suddenly coalesce into an almost-fluent understanding.
At 17, I met a brilliant and attractive French teenager who is now my wife; English would prove useful for reading and writing in medicine; and Latin opened my eyes to the world of words.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Later in life, I took to the habit of learning languages by myself: Spanish in the early twenties, Italian after emigrating to Sardinia at the age of 27, Portuguese at 33 during a three-month trip to Brazil.
With the exception of Sardinian and Dutch, I have never spoken any of these languages and hardly remember a single word of them.
But one of the consequences of repeated exposure to other languages is that, today, I read grammar as quickly and as passionately as I would read love letters.
I dont question the usefulness of teaching some language skills before going on a vacation, but this is not the scope of this guide.
The Word Brain is about the effort adults need to undertake to speak and understand another language.
The definition includes the ability Web: TheWordBrain.com Goals     | to read essays or newspapers to understand TV news or documentary programmes to imagine the correct spelling of words while listening to TV news or documentaries to understand everyday conversation In other words, The Word Brain describes the steps to metamorphosize yourself from a perfect illiterate to a person who has fluent hearing and reading abilities in another language.
Depending on a number of variables that I will discuss, the time estimated to accomplish your task is between one and five years.
If you have to learn another language in the future, you might find some useful hints about how to streamline your project and save time.
Although it is not a treaty on neuroscience, The Word Brain introduces basic concepts of processing and storage of information in our word brain.
; you will discover some of your extraordinary reading abilities; learn how differently your brain processes spoken words and written words; see the need of sequencing speech in small slices; discover the extraordinary Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain accomplishments of your memory; and, finally, conceive a strategic plan to crack your next language as quickly and as reliably as possible.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | Words Words are the fuel of language and the number of words you are familiar with determines your language abilities.
The more words you know, the better you are.
To be comfortable in another language you need roughly half of the words you possess in your native language  25,000.
As about 40 percent are variants of other words and can be easily inferred, a good estimate of truly unique words you need to start with is 15,000 words.
This is a huge number and double what you are Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain expected to learn in 8 years at school.
In order to understand how many truly new words you will have to manage  words you have never seen before and which you cannot deduce from other languages you know  we need a short history of your linguistic abilities:  What is your native language?
Based on your answers, good teachers are able to make a reliable estimate of the number of words you must transfer into your brain.
At the other end of the spectrum you will find languages that are closely related to those you already know.
If you ask a 17year-old French student without any previous exposure to the Italian language to screen an Italian dictionary, he will immediately be able to tell you the meaning of around 6,000 words.
The descendants of the Roman Empire  the Italians, Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | Spanish, Portuguese, French, and, to a lesser extent, Romanians  are therefore navigating in familiar waters when learning each others languages.
Once your teachers define the word quota you have to burn into your brain, the next question is: how long will it take me to learn these words?
The Memory chapter shows in more detail that word learning is a result of repeated exposures over weeks and months, a succession of stations, a Via Dolorosa.
You will not be nailed to a cross, but dont be amazed that the stations of a typical Via Dolorosa may not suffice to nail new words permanently into your brain.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain At a conservative estimate of 10 words per hour, it will take you 500 hours to learn 5,000 words (French/Spanish) and 1,500 hours to learn 15,000 words (European/Arabic).
Take your daily study time from the left column in Table 1.1 and pick from the appropriate column on the right side (easy language: 5,000 words; difficult language, 15,000 words) the number of months you need to complete your word training.
In order to learn like a child you would need to be born into a new family, with a new mother, a new father, new brothers and sisters, to be raised with love until the age of 6 and be sent to school for another 10 years.
So, who is eligible to embark on a full-scale attack on another language in the sense we defined in the introduction, that is, being fluent in reading newspapers and understanding TV documentaries and day-to-day conversation?
You are planning the final ascent to the 4,808 m summit of Mont Blanc, starting at the Gouter Hut at 3,800 m?
As you know that it takes you 30 minutes to climb 100 meters, you can expect to reach the summit in about five hours.
Some of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain friends may get to the summit in 4 hours, others in 6 hours, but nobody will do it in 30 minutes.
As you will see in the coming chapters, importing 5,000 to 15,000 new words into your brain in 500 to 1,500 hours turns out to be THE major battlefield in language learning, representing 80 percent and more of your total effort.
If you are motivated and still willing to follow me, my first prescription would be that you start learning words on a daily basis, at least five days a week, and that you start now.
Impenetrable as foreign languages appear to be, on the scale of a human lifetime, they are just around the corner  give them two or three years, and any of them is yours.
You are able to decipher a restaurant menu and order a dish of spaghetti, but comprehension vanishes as soon as the waiter starts talking.
Not only do young children readily soak up any of the thousands of possible human languages, but they also learn to understand a huge variety of radically different pronunciations  mum and dad, the neighbours, the fisherman at the street corner, people speaking other dialects, stuttering infants, and toothless grandparents.
You didnt lose a minute setting about the most important task of your life: putting structure into the sound produced by the people who inhabited your life.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | To show the magnitude of the task you face in a new language, try to delimit the word boundaries: Figure 2.1: Sound wave pattern of  Putting structure into the porridge of sound produced by the people who inhabited your life.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain This type of frequency analysis is dependent on a wellfunctioning memory that accumulates an ever-growing number of words and, of course, extensive training.
As human speech can produce three and more words per second, there is little time for either childish astonishment or for adult considerations such as What does that word exactly mean?, Is the verb in the present or past tense?, What the hell is that grammatical structure?, etc.
Speech comprehension is therefore a triple challenge: slicing human speech into digestible units, endowing them with meaning by matching the segments with thousands of existing words stored in your brain dictionary, and, finally, doing all this without giving it a second thought.
Fortunately, our word brain is genetically programmed to do these mental acrobatics, and as you have already done it once  when you learned your native language  you can do it again with other languages as often as you want.
It immediately raises a couple of questions: Could the time of exposure that is needed to achieve full sequencing abilities  1,500 hours would translate into 6, 4, and 2 hours per day over a period of 9, 12, and 24 months, respectively)  be a human constant?
Some of these questions will be answered by future research, but I am inclined to accept that there is a physiological threshold for human brains to get wired to the ability of dissecting the sounds of new languages.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain So, if private and public schools are not in a position to provide us with sufficient exposure to human speech, where can we go to get it?
The younger you are, the more flexible your brain, and the easier it will be to find yourself in groups of people who never stop talking.
With a workload of 500 to 1,500 hours from the previous chapter, you may find it demanding to accommodate another 1,500 hours of training in your time schedule.
you will manage to dissolve the bulk of your speech recognition programme in daily life (like a murderer who dissolves a corpse in an acid bath!).
As expected, even with the text in front of your eyes, comprehension of the audio sources is not always immediate.
Some audio devices come with a convenient button to define the beginning and the end of the loop.
It is certainly impossible to learn words during sleep, but the sound and music of the new language will certainly enter your brain.
Scientists will appreciate the excellent podcast transcripts of the journal Nature (those published before July 2014; www.Amedeo.net/s.php?s=1), the WHO (www.Amedeo.net/s.php?s=3) and the Centers for Disease Control (www.Amedeo.net/s.php?s=2) which offer top-quality audio files about progress in science and medicine.
The journalists talk continuously, there is no background music to spoil the sound of the speech, the language is standardised with only a few slang words, and the images provide you with important clues for understanding whats going on.
In addition, TV news provides all the ingredients of a classical soap opera: the players (politicians) and the content (political crises) are well known, and often you already know half of the story.
The TV genres that serve your purpose most are the news and documentaries if you wish to become familiar with the language of the media and the language of science; and soap operas if you are interested in more colloquial language.
As you will see later, identifying words inside the speech soup is partly independent of knowing the meaning of the words.
To understand the meaning, your built-in speech-recognition system cuts human speech into single words, matches them with your vast brain dictionary, and does all this more or less unconsciously at a rate of three words per second.
Again, your brain will be acting as a huge sponge, as cracking the code of human language is not a reserved hunting ground for infants and young children.
You have been told to learn 5,000 to 15,000 words and complete a 1,500-hour speech recognition course, but nobody has asked you to say a single word.
Legitimately, you wonder if you will one day be authorised to pronounce some of the words you have learned and to communicate your precious thoughts to other people.
As you are a virgin  linguistically speaking  you might prefer to Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain stay that way for a while.
Concentrate on absorbing words, sounds and sentences, and, day after day, let the sound of the new language slowly sink in.
Adding these 100 hours to the initial workload defined in Chapter 1 (500 to 1,500 hours for importing 5,000 to 15,000 words into your word brain; see page 20), your total workload is now 600 to 1,600 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | Reading Ocne uopn a tmie trhee lived in a cietarn vlagile a lttile cnortuy gril, the prettseit crteuare who was eevr seen.
If you are not, understanding the previous paragraph is more challenging, because your deciphering skill depends on the number of years you have been reading English.
The words have been modified only slightly, with the first and the last letter still in place and the others shuffled at random.
Each word is a pictogram like a toilet sign in airports, and slight variations of the pictogram are irrelevant for Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain comprehension.
So please sit back for a few seconds, close your eyes and realise what an extraordinary ability reading is: recognising and endowing with meaning, effortlessly and within a fraction of a second, any single subset of 50,000 (or more!)
You possess this ability because you are the owner of the most complex structure in the universe, the result of hundreds of millions of years of evolution: the human brain.
At present, you read faster than you did at the age of 20; at 20, you read faster than at 15; at 15 faster than at 10; at 10 faster than at 8, and so on.
For scientists with a basic knowledge in chemistry, the meaning and pronunciation of the word is as evident as the meaning and pronunciation of love and peace.
Reading is different from listening because training your reading skills comes as a bonus of the obligatory learning of the 5,000 to 15,000 words.
In order to digest such a huge amount of words, you must read them  again and again  and check them  again and again.
Exactly how familiar and how tremendously important the Latin alphabet is becomes evident if you complicate things a step further and select a language with equally unfamiliar words + a different alphabet + the irritating habit of skipping half of the vowels.
In Arabic you will discover, much to your dismay, that you need to know the function of a word within a sentence  is it a noun?
As a consequence, reading, which is supposed to support you during the learning process, is frequently of no help at all, because you actually need to know what you are learning before you can read it.
Well, thats exactly how complicated reading and learning a language is when 50 percent of the Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain vowels are left to the beginners guesswork.
Just to make sure that you are not left with any false delusions, add the following facts: a) written Arabic is spoken nowhere except on TV and at meetings or presentations; b) in order to speak everyday Arabic you have to learn additional country dialects which in practise amounts to learning another language (like learning Italian once you have learned Spanish); c) in Arabic-speaking countries, there is less opportunity to visit provinces and cities with the fascination and vibrations that inspire dreams of fabulous 6-month fullimmersion experiences typical in Tuscany, Dordogne, Seville, Berlin, Edinburgh, Freiburg, Orgosolo, Amsterdam, Stockholm, or Lisbon  and you swiftly realise that you need to have pretty good reasons to start learning Arabic.
You will soon find out that reading is easier than listening, because it does not require high-speed processing of several words per second; instead, while deciphering a text, you can take all the time you need until you understand everything  lingering on single words, going back and forth through a sentence, leaping between paragraphs.
Remember that in educated people, most words enter the brain via the eyes; they are not the result of babbling, chattering, gossiping, or palavering, but of intense reading at school, at university or during professional occupation.
So even if you understand 99 percent of the words presented in a collection of newspaper articles, this percentage will substantially drop when you start reading novels or sources that contain colloquial language.
Over the years, you will see that it is the single most important book of your language project.
Buy it soon and mark the pages that Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain correspond to the individual letters (see Figure 3.1).
Now take a text of your choice, underline the new words, search for them in your dictionary, write them down in a neat, hand-written list or in a computer document, and learn them.
Even if you are not going to learn a whole dictionary by heart, you may decide one day to repeat the words that you are supposed to know.
These people are fluent at reading the scientific literature about medicine, philosophy, music, or philology, but dont understand a person talking about the very same topics and using the very same words.
Training the visual brain areas at the back of the head (see Figure 3.3) has little Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain influence on the performance of the auditory brain areas.
Fortunately, the number of grammar rules is limited, and if you have some experience with grammar, you could also decide to go on your own.
It is beyond the purpose of this short introduction to shed an unfavourable light on deficient language teachers, but let me nonetheless warn you about two types you might wish to avoid.
The first group comprises teachers who do not really know what they are doing, as language teaching is one of the rare professional activities where people are allowed to teach a process which they havent experienced themselves.
If you book a vacation to attend English classes in private schools in London or French classes in Paris or Spanish classes in Seville, the odds are substantial that your teachers will have a perfect knowledge of one, but only one language  their own  and will themselves never have been through the rough process of mastering Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain another language.
Do they have the faintest idea of how demanding it is to penetrate the dense thicket of high-speed human speech?
But life is unpredictable, dreams dont always materialise, and in order to make a living, some people accept the role of a language teacher.
You have decided to become fluent in another language, you are ready to invest years, and your desire is to achieve the most.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | In order to get a clearer picture of language teaching and, consequently, of how to avoid bored and boring teachers, lets address a list of the services teachers should provide.
Writing comes as a bonus of reading, reading as a bonus of word learning, and as you will see in the Speaking chapter, correct pronunciation comes as a bonus of hundreds of hours of listening.
Grammar consists of a fairly limited number of rules that tell you how to modify words and how to arrange them to form correct and beautiful sentences.
To English native-speakers, they do not seem impressive because, with the exception of a small number of irregular verbs such as go-wentgone, write-wrote-written, etc., the English verb system is disarmingly simple.
Just put a few auxiliaries around them  have, shall, and will  and you will have created all the tenses and moods you need.
The Italian equivalent, volere, needs 6 different forms... just for the present tense: I want voglio you want vuoi he/she/it wants vuole we want vogliamo you want volete they want vogliono And this is only the beginning.
Surprise: verbs are icebergs, and what you see in dictionaries, for example baciare  to kiss, volere  to want, fare  to do, andare  to go, are just the tips.
Now that you have outsourced the study of verb forms to autonomous learning, grammar per se shrinks to a set of about 30 problems to settle.
If you followed my prescriptions in the first chapters  1) Learn 20 or more new words per day; 2) Listen to human speech for at least one hour per day  all I would ask you at this point is to rapidly assemble the knowledge that is needed to recognise the most frequent grammatical structures.
Even allowing for a few tricky rules, you will be electrified to acquire these passive skills in a few weeks and to discover that grammar is a fairly manageable thing.
), and a limited number of pronouns (I, you, he, she, me, him, her, my, your, his; to name only a few);  the order in which to arrange the words in a sentence;  how to count and to ask questions;  how to localise things in time and space.
The star of the tale is T. K., a friend from medical school who is now a professor of immunology at a German university.
As I had just developed a small piece of software on the mythical Commodore 64 (see the subsequent Internet release at www.Poliglottus.com), I was happy to test it on a complaisant guinea pig.
The experiment nicely showed the feasibility of a fast introduction to grammar, and also opened the perspective of reading newspapers or magazines, which is clearly more enjoyable and motivating than reading language manuals.
Depending on your previous exposure to your native and subsequent languages, your coach will prepare an individual time schedule for your project; recommend books, podcasts, audio books, and broadcasts; provide the first round of grammar; advise you on how to manage your daily word quota; teach you how to check that new Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | words have arrived in your long-term memory; and demonstrate common pronunciation pitfalls.
In terms of the workload:income ratio, the best patients are asymptomatic and relatively healthy patients with a chronic condition (diabetes, high cholesterol, hypertension) who need to renew their prescription every month for the rest of their life.
| The Word Brain Opt for the coach model and limit the number of lessons.
Your total workload is now 800 to 1,800 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | Speaking The day you utter your first words in a new language is not always a happy day.
From what we saw in the Listening chapter, part of the solution was to postpone speech, and to just listen to the sounds of the world.
It took approximately 5 to 7 months before you started to babble and utter meaningless sounds such as ba-baba-ba-ba, ka-bu-ba-da-mi; and only when you reached the age of 12 months were you ready to experiment with real words and two-word sentences, generally in order to express desire: More juice, Want cookie.
To proclaim the resolutions of your brain to the world, you have to co-ordinate dozens of muscles in your larynx, pharynx, neck, cheeks, mouth, and tongue.
Putting all these pieces into the perfect position in a minimum amount of time is a remarkable acrobatic performance, and even children need years of exercise.
From the very beginning, comprehension has a head start over speech production  when you stutter your first barely intelligible sounds, you already possess a vast passive repertoire of hundreds of words.
As a result of years of listening, the part of your word brain that processes sounds is better trained than the part that produces speech.
You have only one life to tell  your own  while your co-humans make you listen to hundreds of different lives in different places and in different circumstances.
You know hundreds or thousands of words from listening to priests, rabbis, and imams, but, again, you would not want to use them yourself because, as a scientist, you feel that God and the gods exist because our ancestors had the wisdom to create them.
Because of the huge variability of human biographies  sometimes disgustingly ugly, but most often creative, stimulating, and refreshing  you know thousands of words you will never utter.
Imitate the sounds, in particular the length of the vowels and the melody of the sentences.
Imagine that you step into one of the Paris boulevard restaurants and order an overprized micro-bottle of mineral water and a dish of spaghetti bolognese.
To be honest, you didnt look like a weathered adult, in control of life, family and career, but rather like a clumsy and gawky creature or bungling adolescent, struggling to find your way in the world.
Thats the way it is: during your first steps in a new language, at best, you regress to a kind of cutesy childhood, at worst, you are a weirdo, a nobody, an untouchable.
That is, of course, the end of the dream of speaking another language.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain They vary from individual to individual and comprise a certain sense of comedy and self-mockery; or, in some cases, the determination to break with suffocating families and to betray the family language; or simply semi-schizophrenic prospecting of imaginary variants of yourself.
To go through the process of language acquisition, you will 1. learn 5,000 to 15,000 words in about 500 to 1,500 study hours; 2. train your ear and associated brain regions to perform realtime speech processing; 3. train your eyes and associated brain regions to perform fast reading; 4. train your vocal tract and associated brain regions to produce intelligible speech; 5. train your grammar sense during successive fast overviews.
Your total workload is now 850 to 1,850 hours Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | Memory In your native language, your brain recognises  and endows with meaning  any conceivable subset of 50,000+ words within fractions of a second.
Imagine that, during your first trip to Paris, a friendly local takes you on a two-hour stroll from Notre Dame to the Louvre, then northwards up to the SacrCur, and, finally, down to Pigalle.
It does so because glass is woven into your brain in many different ways: you have a mental image of a glass; you Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain have a memory trace for the spoken word; you have a memory trace for the written word; you know that the word has 5 letters, that it starts with a g and ends with an s; you have a motor recipe for pronouncing the word; and, on demand, you can recall hundreds of memories associated with the word  glasses raised to celebrate births, marriages, and anniversaries, or a glass smashed against a wall.
Any single of your 50,000+ native words is intertwined in multiple locations of your brain, floating in a sea of meanings, facts, and emotions.
As soon as you wake up in the morning, all brain words go into stand-by mode, waiting to jump into consciousness as soon as their equivalents  written or spoken words  enter the brain via your eyes or ears.
These are highly specialised interfaces where information is passed from axons  slim extensions that carry the electric signals generated by the neurones  to dendrites, which are highly branched tree-like structures that receive the signals originated in other neurones (Figure 6.2).
The resulting picture is majestic: one billion synaptic connections in a single cubic millimetre of specialised brain Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain tissue, up to 1000 trillion (1015) in a human brain.
The resulting plasticity of the brain can even be observed macroscopically, for example in London, taxi drivers from preGPS times who developed a hypertrophy of the brain region that is involved in spatial orientation, or in violin players who have an enlargement of the left hand representation in the sensorimotor cortex.
The extent of the deconstruction going on in your brain was nicely shown by 19th century experiments that measured the time of learning  and subsequent forgetting  of chains of 2,300 nonsense consonant-vowel-consonant syllables such as KOJ, BOK, and YAT.
At the weakest stage, you dont even remember that you have seen a word; however, you would recognise it when presented in a list of words.
Imagine your word brain as a castle protected by high walls and ruled by the lord of the castle, who has issued unambiguous instructions to the sentries at the gate: no entry without multiple petitions and repetitions!
What is fine for physics and higher mathematics, most of which is irrelevant in ordinary life, is intolerable for languages where you need every bit of information for the rest of your life.
I am therefore reluctant to tell you that you learn words when, in fact, I mean that you need to store them in your word brain in a fairly definitive way.
The alternative for learning should express that a word will stay in your brain for decades: it may corrode and slowly become weaker, but it will nonetheless resist and surrender only to arteriosclerosis.
All you need to do is to add two pieces of information to an existing word web: first, how you write a new word and, second, how to pronounce it; everything else  knowledge about the word in your native language and associated memories  is already in place.
In practise, you will have to dress a two-column list, putting your new and your native language face to face (see an example in Table 6.1).
Word lists are not perfect  German Brot is different from French pain, it looks different, it smells different, and it tastes better  but with 5,000 to 15,000 words to nail, you cannot afford to lose time with subtleties.
The pre-existing webs of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain word brain are a unique support for nailing new words.
The younger you are, the easier new languages flow into your brain so that the teens and twenties are clearly the most suitable moments in life.
If you repeatedly subtract a single-digit number from a larger number directly after one of your nailing sessions, you will see that your memory is impaired for the 3 to 5 most recently nailed words.
In other words: start a four-year language training course today, and in four years, I expect you to have language skills that are clearly superior to those of a 6-year-old child.
Nailing is about strategies to cope with the huge number of words you have to burn into your brain.
Depending on the language you are going to learn, 5,000 to 15,000 words are waiting to be nailed into your brain (see Chapter 1).
In extraordinary circumstances  you are abroad, start at 7 oclock in the morning, and continue until noon before spending the rest of the day with native speakers  you can nail 50 or even more words every day.
The more words you know, the better you are.
(Remember: use the words of your native language as solid anchors for the words of the new language!)
Check the spelling, imagine the sound of the word and make a guess at the resistance a word is likely to oppose: easy to learn or not?
But what is practical at an artisan level is impractical for Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain the mass digestion of 5,000 to 15,000 words, and you wouldnt want to bother your grandmother, mother, wife, daughter or granddaughter for months or years on end.
At a rate of 20, 30, or 40 new words a day, the time will come when you will feel like a force-fed French goose.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Nailing | While pioneering the world of words, you will one day have the curiosity to open a 200-page grammar book.
To your satisfaction, you will realise that daily listening to your audio sources (remember the manual CDs, TV programmes and audio books of the Listening chapter) has paved the way to understanding grammar.
As your word repertoire increases and the number of missing words diminishes, you will one day discover how exciting it is to work on essays, newspapers or novels.
At this point, you can even slow down your nailing rhythm, but only on one condition: that you extract from your reading sources double the number of words that is on your nailing schedule.
Germans will appreciate that Turkish is as beautiful as German; French people will be delighted that Arabic is as expressive and gentle as French; and Italians will be pleased to discover that Albanian is as subtle and amusing as Italian.
Just imagine yourself in an intense love affair, spending weeks and months in close symbiosis, exposed to a single linguistic source, discussing the world from dusk to Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain dawn, and all this submerged in memory-stimulating emotions, supplemented with memory-boosting physical activity.
The textbook triggered the construction of www.Amedeo.com that, in turn, provided the funding for a 24month Arabic sabbatical.
The most satisfying insight of the last two hours is that language learning is a mere variable of time: you may decide that you have no time, but never again will you need to say that you have no talent for it.
If, instead, you find the time to learn a new language, I wish you the very best.
Several studies have shown that dexamphetamine 10 mg on 5 consecutive days, enhanced both the rate of learning and the retention of the words one hour, one week and one month later (Whiting 2005).
The line of reasoning is as follows: We are ready to give brain-doping drugs to adults with neuropsychiatric disorders and severe memory and concentration problems.
Most drugs have adverse effects  a fortiori when used chronically  and I predict that after decades of use, brain-doping drugs will be shown to produce devastating effects on the brains of those who wanted to  in brain-doping parlance  perform better and enjoy more achievements and success.
By then, editors of prestigious international journals of science will have issued a public Mea Culpa for having invited the wrong people to shape the discussion.
