ONE While I Was Sleeping Your Highnesses, as Catholic Christians, and princes who love and promote the holy Christian faith, and are enemies of the doctrine of Mahomet, and of all idolatry and heresy, determined to send me, Christopher Columbus, to the above-mentioned countries of India, to see the said princes, people, and territo ries, and to learn their disposition and the proper method of converting them to our holy faith; and furthermore directed that I should not proceed by land to the East, as is customary, but by a Westerly route, in which direction we have hith erto no certain evidence that anyone has gone.
Columbus sailed with the Nina, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria in an effort to discover a shorter, more di rect route to India by heading west, across the Atlantic, on what he pre sumed to be an open sea route to the East Indies rather than going south and east around Africa, as Portuguese explorers of his day were try ing to do.
At the same time, he added, computers became cheaper and dispersed all over the world, and there was an explosion of softwaree-mail, search engines like Google, and proprietary software that can chop up any piece of work and send one WHILE I WAS SLEEPING part to Boston, one part to Bangalore, and one part to Beijing, making it easy for anyone to do remote development.
Here I was in Bangaloremore than five hundred years after Columbus sailed over the horizon, using the rudimentary navigational technologies of his day, and returned safely to prove definitively that the world was roundand one of India's smartest engineers, trained at his country's top technical institute and backed by the most modern tech nologies of his day, was essentially telling me that the world was flatas flat as that screen on which he can host a meeting of his whole global supply chain.
Clearly Nandan was right: It is now possible for more people than ever to collaborate and compete in real time with more other people on more different kinds of work from more different corners of the planet and on a more equal footing than at any previous time in the history of the worldusing computers, e-mail, fiber-optic networks, teleconferencing, and dynamic new software.
But I was also excited personally, because what the flattening of the world means is that we are now connecting all the knowledge centers on the planet together into a single global network, whichif politics and terrorism do not get in the waycould usher in an amazing era of prosperity, innovation, and collaboration, by companies, communities, and individuals.
In the first half of this era, global integration was powered by falling trans portation costs, thanks to the steam engine and the railroad, and in the second half by falling telecommunication coststhanks to the diffusion of the telegraph, telephones, the PC, satellites, fiber-optic cable, and the early version of the World Wide Web.
Just a hint: The flat-world platform is the product of a convergence of the personal computer (which allowed every individual suddenly to become the author of his or her own content in digital form) with fiber-optic cable (which suddenly allowed all those individ uals to access more and more digital content around the world for next to nothing) with the rise of work flow software (which enabled individ- WHILE I WAS SLEEPING uals all over the world to collaborate on that same digital content from anywhere, regardless of the distances between them).
The dot-com bust and the flattening of the world forced Glocer to re think how Reuters delivered newswhether it could disaggregate the functions of a journalist and ship the low-value-added functions to India.
I was wandering around the Microsoft section around six p.m. Bangalore time, when most of these young people start their workday to coincide with the dawn in America, when I asked a young Indian com puter expert there a simple question: What was the record on the floor for the longest phone call to help some American who got lost in the maze of his or her own software?
As that continues, we really will see the beginning of what Satyam Cherukuri, of Sarnoff, an American research and development firm, has called "the globaliza tion of innovation" and an end to the old model of a single American or European multinational handling all the elements of the product devel opment cycle from its own resources.
The Chinese may never forgive Japan for what it did to China in the last century, but the Chinese are so focused on leading the world in the next century that they are ready to brush up on their Japanese and take all the work Japan can outsource.
The first e-tutoring businesses started less than three years ago, and already thousands of Indian teachers coach U.S. students in math, science or English for about $15 to $20 an hour, a fraction of the $40 to $100 that private tutoring costs in the United States... Princeton's mother, Bessy Piusten, is pleased with the results, saying her children have been getting all A's and B's since they started online tutoring about two years ago .
I am convinced that the flattening of the world, if it continues, will be seen in time as one of those fundamental shifts or inflection points, like Gutenberg's invention of the printing press, the rise of the nation-state, or the Industrial Revolutioneach of which, in its day, noted Rothkopf, produced changes in the role of individuals, the role and form of gov ernments, the ways business was done and wars were fought, the role of women, the forms religion and art took, and the way science and re search were conducted, not to mention the political labels that we as a civilization have assigned to ourselves and to our enemies.
To put it another way, the experiences of the high-tech companies in the last few decades that failed to navigate the rapid changes brought about in their marketplace by these types of forces may be a warning to all the businesses, institutions, and nation-states that are now facing these inevitable, even predictable, changes but lack the leadership, flexibility, and imagination to adaptnot because they are not smart or aware, but because the speed of change is simply overwhelming them.
While the fall of the wall eliminated a physical and geopolitical barrierone that held back THE WORLD IS FLAT information, stood in the way of shared standards, and kept us from having a view of the world as a single unified communitythe rise of the Windows-enabled PC, which really popularized personal computing, eliminated another hugely important barrier: the limit on the amount of information that any single individual could amass, author, manipulate, and diffuse.
And once more and more people connected their Windows-enabled PCs with that global communications platform, which spread even THE WORLD IS FLAT more quickly after 1989, when the Berlin Wall came down (and China and India started opening to the global economy), there was nothing to stop the digital representation of everythingwords, music, photos, data, video and then the global exchange of all that digital informa tion.
The political constraint on individual reach collapsed with the fall of the Berlin Wall (though of course large swaths of repression still ex ist), and the practical constraint on individual reach collapsed with the rise of the Apple and Windows-enabled, modem-connected IBM PC.
As I said, this level of connectivity surely helped to put the nail in the coffin of communism, because the very tools that were being used to im prove productivity in the West (PCs, faxes, modems), even though much THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD scarcer in the East, vastly improved horizontal person-to-person commu nication there, to the detriment of top-down Communist systems.
And once that mission had been accomplishedthe Soviets completed their pullout from Afghanistan on February 15, 1989, just nine months before the fall of the Berlin W a l l bin Laden looked around and found that the other superpower, the United States, had a huge presence in his own native land, Saudi Arabia, the home of the two holiest cities in Islam.
The "event" that made that happen was actually a coincidence of events that took place in the space of just a few years in the 1990sthe emergence of the Internet as a tool of low-cost global connectivity; the emergence, on top of the Internet, of the World Wide Web as a seem ingly magical virtual realm where individuals could post their digital content for everyone else to access; and, finally, the spread of the com mercial Web browser, which could retrieve documents or Web pages stored in Web sites and display them on any computer screen in such a simple manner that everyone wouldand didwant to use it.
Yes, there were emerging e-mail systems and networks to communicate with on the THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Internet, but sharing data was really rudimentarybecause there were no Web sites or Web pages or Web browsers to bring to life the data in other people's computers, and worse, no easy way to navigate to them.
The more alive the Internet became, the more different people wanted to do different things on the Web, so the more they de manded computers, software, and telecommunications networks that could easily digitize words, music, data, and photos and transport them on the Internet to anyone else's computer.
Joe in the accounting department would get on his office PC and try THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD to get the latest sales numbers for 1995, but he couldn't do that because the sales department was on a different system from the one accounting was using.
Once the PC-Windows revolution demon strated to everyone the value of being able to digitize information and manipulate it on computers and word processors, and once the browser brought the Internet alive and made Web pages sing and dance and dis play, everyone wanted everything digitized as much as possible so they could send it to someone else down the Internet pipes.
The cable functions as a kind of light guide, guiding the light pulses introduced at one end of the cable through to the other end, where a light-sensitive receiver con verts the pulses back into the electronic digital Is and Os of the original signal, so they can then show up on your computer screen as e-mail or in your cell phone as a voice.
Just as the na tional highway system that was built in the 1950s flattened the United States, broke down regional differences, and made it so much easier for companies to relocate in lower-wage regions, like the South, because it had become so much easier to move people and goods long distances, so the laying of global fiber highways flattened the developed world.
While a huge amount of long-distance fiber cable was laid to connect India and America, virtually none of these new U.S. telecom companies laid any substantial new local loop infrastructure, due to a failure of the 1996 tele com deregulation act to permit real competition in the local loop be tween the cable companies and the telephone companies.
"Every layer of innovation gets built on the next," said Andreessen, who went on from Netscape to start another high-tech firm, Opsware Inc. "And today the most profound thing to me is the fact that a fourteenyear-old in Romania or Bangalore or the Soviet Union or Vietnam has all the information, all the tools, all the software easily available to apply knowledge however they want.
I I, ATT I\ \ I, R // ^ WORK I FLOW SOFTWARE met Scott Hyten, the C E O of Wild Brain, a cutting-edge animation studio in San Francisco that produces films and cartoons for Disney and other major studios, at a meeting in Silicon Valley in the winter of 2004.1 had been invited by John Doerr, the venture capitalist, to test out the ideas in this book with a few of the companies that he was backing.
"The recording session," explained Hyten, "is located near the artist, usually in New York or L.A., the design and direction is done in San Francisco, the writers network in from their homes (Florida, London, New York, Chicago, L A , and San Francisco), and the animation of the char acters is done in Bangalore with edits from San Francisco.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD This VPN allows us to share the feed from the microphone, images from the session, the real-time script, and all the animation designs amongst all the locations with a simple log-in.
Remember, before the diffusion of computers and the Internet, work flow consisted of your sales department taking an or der on paper over the phone, walking it over to your shipping depart ment, which shipped the product, and then someone from shipping walking over to billing with a piece of paper and instructing the billing department to churn out an invoice to the customer.
Your sales department could take an order over the phone or by mail, en ter it into a computer system, e-mail the order to the shipping depart ment within your own company, and then have the shipping department send out the product to the customer and automatically spit out a com puterized bill at the same time.
The more we con nect everyone through common communication standards, like XML, and then, on top of those protocols, connect more and more people through standardized business processes, said Cawley, the easier it is to THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD chop up work and send pieces of it to be done anywhere in the world, and the more it increases productivity and enables my whole digital ecosystem to collaborate better, cheaper, and faster, and the more energy my employees have to concentrate on the high-touch, high-value-add, customized innovation or service that differentiates one company from another.
Then the spread of the Internet and the com ing to life of the Web, thanks to the browser and fiber optics, enabled more people than ever to be connected and to share their digital content with more other people for less money than any time before.
And the geeks in the dorm are increasingly offering up their own songs, and videos, and poetry, and rap, and commentary, to you and me and the rest of the world, cutting out the music stores and the traditional content providers.
I started to think that there were some interesting social dynamics to the way certain kinds of software were written or could be writtenas op posed to the kind of image I had of the professional software developer in the back office tending to the mainframe, feeding info in and taking it out for the business.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD After graduating in 1991, Behlendorf went to Berkeley to study physics, but he quickly became frustrated by the disconnect between the abstractions he was learning in the classroom and the excitement that was starting to emerge on the Internet.
"The Apache tribe was the last tribe to surrender to the oncoming U.S. government, and at the time we wor ried that the big companies would come in and 'civilize' the landscape that the early Internet engineers built.
"IBM said, 'We would like to figure out how we can use [Apache] and not get flamed by the Internet com munity, [how we can] make it sustainable and not just be ripping people off but contributing to the process...' IBM was saying that this new model for software development was trustworthy and valuable, so let's in vest in it and get rid of the one that we are trying to make on our own, which isn't as good."
What CollabNet does, for example, is to create a secure Web THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD site, where those with a password can go and see the source code of the software and the defects that need to be addressed, and then participate in a discussion among engineers, product managers, and customer support on how the software should be improved.
Arguably, it is harder to get into an IIT han into Harvard or the Massachusetts Institute of Technology... IIT lumnus Vinod Khosla, who co-founded Sun Microsystems, said: 'When  finished IIT Delhi and went to Carnegie Mellon for my Masters, I hought I was cruising all the way because it was so easy relative to the ed cation I got at IIT' " HE WORLD IS FLAT or most of their first fifty years, these IITs were one of the greatest argains America ever had.
nd so with Y2K bearing down on us, America and India started dat ng, and that relationship became a huge flattener, because it demon trated to so many different businesses that the combination of the PC, the nternet, and fiber-optic cable had created the possibility of a whole new orm of collaboration and horizontal value creation: outsourcing.
The boom laid the able that connected India to the world, and the bust made the cost of us ng it virtually free and also vastly increased the number of American ompanies that would want to use that fiber-optic cable to outsource nowledge work to India.
You can o to towns on the east coast of China today that you have never heard f and discover that this one town manufactures most of the eyeglass rames in the world, while the town next door manufactures most of the isposable cigarette lighters in the world, and the one next to that is do ng most of the computer screens for Dell, and another is specializing in obile phones.
The same BusinessWeek article oted that this brings economies of scale, intense local rivalries that keep rices low, an army of engineers that is growing by 350,000 annually, oung workers and managers willing to put in twelve-hour days, an un aralleled component base in electronics and light industry, "and an en repreneurial zeal to do whatever it takes to please big retailers such as al-Mart Stores, Target, Best Buy and J.C. hile visiting Beijing in the fall of 2005, I met with Charles M. artin, president of the American Chamber of Commerce for the eople's Republic of China.
China's lead rs are much more focused than many of their Western counterparts on ow to train their young people in the math, science, and computer skills equired for success in the flat world, how to build a physical and tele om infrastructure that will allow Chinese people to plug and play faster nd easier than others, and how to create incentives that will attract lobal investors.
As a result, we now have the best camshaft technology nd a customer base both in China and the U.S." his is a very important point, because the general impression is that ffshoring is a lose-lose proposition for American workerssomething hat was here went over there, and that is the end of the story.
ccording to a January 26, 2004, study by the Heritage Foundation, Job reation and the Taxation of Foreign-Source Income, American compa ies that produce at home and abroad, for both the American market nd China's, generate more than 21 percent of U.S. economic output, roduce 56 percent of U.S. exports, and employ three-fifths of all manu- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD acturing employees, about nine million workers.
What has held China back in the past was the inability f people outside China to get information about the country, and the in bility of people inside China to get information about the rest of the orld.
r, to put it another way, if Americans and Europeans want to bene it from the flattening of the world and the interconnecting of all the HE EN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD arkets and knowledge centers, they will all have to run at least as fast as he fastest lionand I suspect that lion will be China, and I suspect that ill be pretty darn fast.
Supply-chaining is both nabled by the flattening of the world and a hugely important flattener tself, because the more these supply chains grow and proliferate, the ore they force the adoption of common standards between companies so that every link of every supply chain can interface with the next), the ore they eliminate points of friction at borders, the more the efficien ies of one company get adopted by the others, and the more they en ourage global collaboration.
One can only hope hat all the bad publicity Wal-Mart has received in the last few years will orce it to understand that there is a fine line between a hyperefficient lobal supply chain that is helping people save money and improve their ives and one that has pursued cost cutting and profit margins to such a egree that whatever social benefits it is offering with one hand, it is tak ng away with the other.
al-Mart's flattening effects are fully on display in the Seiyu store in umazu  not just the everyday low prices, but the wide aisles, the big allets of household goods, the huge signs displaying the lowest prices in ach category, and the Wal-Mart supply-chain computer system so that tore managers can quickly adjust stock.
ndeed, as consumers have become more empowered to pull their wn products via the Internet and customize them for themselves, UPS as found itself in the interesting position of being not only the company ctually taking the orders but also, as the delivery service, the one hand ng the goods to the buyer at the front door.
Wealth and ower will increasingly accrue to those countries, companies, individuals, niversities, and groups who get three basic things right: the infrastructure o connect with this flat-world platform, the education to get more of their eople innovating on, working off of, and tapping into this platform, and, inally, the governance to get the best out of this platform and cushion its orst side effects.
fter this book came out, Kevin Kelly, one of the founders of Wired agazine, wrote an essay marking the tenth anniversary of the Netscape PO, in which he too concluded, in his own way, that this platform (what e calls "The Machine") for multiple forms of collaboration was indeed the tart of something very, very new and very, very big.
lobalization 3.0, which is built around the convergence of the ten flat eners, and particularly the combination of the PC, the microprocessor, he Internet, and fiber optics, flipped the playing field from largely topdown to more side to side.
I start thinking about how I can use the flatworld platformthat is, how I can use my own network or network of net orksto take the streaming video coming off that drone and feed it, live, o flat-screen TVs in the CIA, the DIA, the NSA, army intelligence, and ir force intelligence, and then integrate each of those analysts into a sin le chat room, so they can type in their responses to what they are seeing nd what sort of threat it poses, as the video is streaming, and that chat will ome up alongside the screen, so we all can analyze it together.
P. V. Kannan, the C E O and cofounder of the ndian call-center company 24/7 Customer, told me that in the last ecade, he went from sweating out whether he would ever get a chance o work in America to becoming one of the leading figures in the out ourcing of services from America to the rest of the world.
But the Internet as helped us to be able to aggregate different kinds of content at the ouch of a button, and today if someone asks you to make something that ooks like Tom and Jerry, you just say 'Google Tom and Jerry' and you've ot tons and tons of pictures and information and reviews and write-ups bout Tom and Jerry, which you can read and simulate."
Applications rom Chinese and Russian high school students to attend Yale as under raduates have gone from a total of 40 Chinese for the class of 2001 to 76 for the class of 2008, and from 18 Russians for the class of 2001 to 30 or the class of 2008.
In the old days, xplained Pickering, Boeing would say to its Japanese subcontractors, We will send you the plans for the wings of the 777. oday Boeing says to the giant Japanese industrial company Mitsu ishi, "Here are the general parameters for the wings of the new 7E7.
onday Morning, one of Scandinavia's leading independent think anks, found a compelling way to describe the disorienting sorting-out rocess that many institutions are now going through: "With accelerating peed, we have moved from the industrial society via the knowledge soci ty to the present stage of a disintegrating society" on our way to "a new lobal collaborative society" in which "old power structures and lessons earned are challenged by new market forces and values."
It is not only the largest consumer technology com any in the world; it is the largest IT company in Europe, the largest IT ompany in Russia, the largest IT company in the Middle East, and the argest IT company in South Africa.
And the Wal-Mart citizen in us knows that because WalMart, the biggest company in America, doesn't cover all its employees ith health care, some of them will just go to the emergency ward of the ocal hospital and the taxpayers will end up picking up the tab.
Think  H E W O R L D IS F L A T bout it: Social conservatives from the right wing of the Republican party, ho do not like globalization or closer integration with the world because t brings too many foreigners and foreign cultural mores into America, ight align themselves with unions from the left wing of the Democratic arty, who don't like globalization for the way it facilitates the outsourcing nd offshoring of jobs.
Let's face it: Republican cultural onservatives have much more in common with the steelworkers of oungstown, Ohio, the farmers of rural China, and the mullahs of central audi Arabia, who would also like more walls, than they do with invest ent bankers on Wall Street or service workers linked to the global econ my in Palo Alto, who have been enriched by the flattening of the world.
he Passion of the Christ audience will be in the same trench with he Teamsters and the AFL-CIO, while the Hollywood and Wall Street iberals and the You've Got Mail crowd will be in the same trench with he high-tech workers of Silicon Valley and the global service providers f Manhattan and San Francisco.
Countries, companies, and individuals will be able to give intelligent nswers to these questions only if they understand the real nature and exture of the global playing field and how different it is from the one that xisted in the Cold War era and before.
If we go from a world in which there were fifteen drug companies nd fifteen software companies in America (thirty in all) and two drug ompanies and two software companies in China (four in all) to a world n which there are thirty drug and software companies in America and hirty drug and software companies in China, it is going to mean more nnovation, more cures, more niches to specialize in, more new products o customize to individuals or markets, and many more people with igher incomes to buy those products.
But as long as the pie eeps growing and getting more complex, and as long as the individuals n your country keep adding to that pie by imagining new services and roducts in which to specialize, and as long as those individuals keep ducating themselves and developing the skills needed to master these  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ew jobs, workers in India, China, Europe, and America can all do ell at the same time.
And the more they do that, the higher they limb, the more room is created at the top because the more they ave, the more they spend, the more diverse product markets become, nd the more niches for specialization are created as well.
aghuram Rajan, the director of research for the International onetary Fund, sits on the board of HeyMath.com, a very innovative ndian education company that puts Indian students to work over the nternet tutoring students in Singapore and elsewhere, and also em loys Indian, British, and Chinese experts to help HeyMath design the est ways to teach various math and science concepts to young people n grades K-12.
Because the companies that are adjusting best to the flat world are  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ot just making minor changes, they are changing the whole model of the ork they do and how they do itin order to take advantage of the flatworld platform and to compete with others who are doing the same.
herefore, of the many things we need to do, in my view the most im ortant is to identify the new middle jobs that will be less vulnerable to he downward wage pressures of outsourcing, automation, and techno ogical change and to identify the particular skills and education they ill demandso that more weakers can reap the benefits.
HE REEN EOPLE hen three billion people from China, India, and the former Soviet mpire walk onto the flat-world platform in a very short period of time, nd every one of them wants a house, a car, a microwave, and a refrigera or, if we don't learn how to do more things with less energy and lower missions, we are going to create an environmental disaster and make our lanet unlivable for our children.
At a moment HE RIGHT STUFF ike this one, I feel it would be useful to step back, take a deep breath, and sk: If the strategies detailed in the previous chapter really are going to be he best way for individuals to obtain and retain jobs in the new middle, hen, generally speaking, what is the right kind of education to prepare ur young people for those jobs?
ne of the best examples of that I can think of is the story that Steve obs, the cofounder of Apple Computer, told about himself in a com encement speech at Stanford University (June 12, 2005):  am honored to be with you today at your commencement from ne of the finest universities in the world.
It is a orld in which comfort with ideas and abstractions is the passport o a good job, in which creativity and innovation are the key to a ood life, in which high levels of educationa very different kind f education than most of us have had are going to be the only ecurity there is.
But as the cost of ommunicating with the other side of the globe falls essentially to ero, as India becomes (by 2010) the country with the most nglish speakers in the world, and as developing nations continue o mint millions of extremely capable knowledge workers, the pro essional lives of people in the West will change dramatically.
t has its own Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science and echnology (OCAST), which, on its Web site, describes its mission as fol ows: "In order to compete effectively in the new economy, Oklahoma ust continue to develop a well-educated population; a collaborative, fo used university research and technology base; and a nurturing environ ent for cutting-edge businesses, from the smallest start-up to the largest nternational headquarters... [OCAST promotes] University-Business echnology centers, which may span several schools and businesses,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T esulting in new businesses being spawned, new products being manu actured, and new manufacturing technologies employed."
James McGregor, a journalist-turned-businessman based in China, and a ormer chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China, riting in The Washington  ost, July 31, 2005 u could find no better metaphor for the way the rest of the world an now compete head-to-head more effectively than ever with merica than the struggles of the U.S. Olympic basketball team n 2004.
portswriter John Feinstein could have been referring to either merican engineering skills or American basketball skills when he wrote n an August 26, 2004, AOL essay on Olympic basketball that the perfor ance of the U.S. basketball team is a result of "the rise of the interna ional player" and "the decline and fall of the U.S. And the ecline and fall of the U.S. game, argued Feinstein, is a result of two ong-term trends.
The first is a steady decline "in basketball skills," with merican kids just wanting either to shoot three-point shots or to unk the sort of stuff that gets you on the highlight reel on ESPN's portsCenter instead of learning how to make precise passes, or go into he lane and shoot a pull-up jumper, or snake through big men to get to he basket.
n the previous chapters, I tried to explain why both classic economic heory and the inherent strengths of the American economy leave me con inced that Americans can thrive and claim the jobs of the new middle  rovided we get ready to compete, get every individual to think about how e or she can upgrade his or her educational skills, and keep investing in he secrets of America's sauce.
hat is why I insist that wealth in the age offlatnesswill increasingly HE UIET CRISIS ravitate to those countries who get three basic things right: the infra tructure to connect as efficiently and speedily as possible with the flat orld platform, the right education programs and knowledge skills to em ower more of their people to innovate and do value-added work on that latform, and,finally,the right governancethat is, the right tax policies, he right investment and trade laws, the right support for research, the ight intellectual property laws, and, most of all, the right inspirational eadershipto enhance and manage the flow with the flat world.
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #1: THE NUMBERS GAP  rty little secret number one is that the generation of scientists and ngineers who were motivated to go into science by the threat of putnik in 1957 and the inspiration of JFK are reaching their retirement ears and are not being replaced in the numbers that they must be if an dvanced economy like that of the United States is to remain at the head f the pack.
When ou take a low-wage, low-prestige job in America, like a call center oper tor, and bring it over to India, where it becomes a high-wage, highprestige job, you end up with workers who are paid less but motivated ore. "The dirty little secret is that not only is [outsourcing] cheaper and fficient," the American C E O of a London-headquartered multinational old me, "but the quality and productivity [boost] is huge."
Andrew Rasiej, candidate in 2005 for New York City's office of ublic advocate, trying to run on a platform focused on upgrading New York ity's IT infrastructure (he was not elected)   a person who grew up during the Cold War, I'll always remem er driving along down the highway and listening to the radio, hen suddenly the music would stop and a grim-voiced an ouncer would come on the air and say, "This is a test of the Emergency roadcast System," and then there would be a thirty-second high-pitched iren sound.
It equires our own version of the New Frontier and Great Society adapted o the age offlatness.It requires a president who can summon the nation o get smarter and study harder in science, math, and engineering in or er to reach the new frontiers of knowledge that the flat world is rapidly pening up and pushing out.
n that speech, Kennedy made a vow that has amazing resonance oday: "I am therefore transmitting to the Congress a new Manpower evelopment and Training program, to train or retrain several hundred housand workers, particularly in those areas where we have seen chronic nemployment as a result of technological factors, in new occupational kills over a four-year periodin order to replace those skills made obso ete by automation and industrial change with the new skills which the ew processes demand."
It is to mbrace globalization and understand that a fairer, more compassion te, and more egalitarian society lies in a web of policies aimed not at trengthening the old welfare state or in abolishing it and just letting he market rip but at reconfiguring it to give more Americans the out ook, education, skills, and safety nets they will need to compete against ther individuals in the flat world.
For instance, of all the policy choices that the Republican-led ongress could have made in forging the FY 2005 budget, how in the orld could it have decided to cut the funding of the National Science oundation by more than $100 million?
"I look at the kids who come to Caltech, and they grew up n families that encouraged them to work hard and to put off a little bit of ratification for the future and to understand that they need to hone their kills to play an important role in the world," Baltimore said.
hat all these leaders confronted was the irrefutable fact that more pen and competitive markets are the only sustainable vehicle for grow ng a nation out of poverty, because they are the only guarantee that new deas, technologies, and best practices will easily flow into your country nd that private enterprises, and even government, will have the com etitive incentive and flexibility to adopt those new ideas and turn them nto jobs and products.
arry Kraemer Jr., the former C E O of Baxter International, a medical quipment maker that has made several investments in Ireland, explained hat "the energy level, the work ethic, the tax optimization, and the flexi ility of the labor supply" all made Ireland infinitely more attractive to in est in than France or Germany, where it is enormously costly to fire even ne worker.
John Chambers, the C E O of Cisco ystems, which uses a global supply chain to build the routers that run  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he Internet and is constantly being wooed to invest in one country or an ther, said it best: "The jobs are going to go where the best-educated orkforce is with the most competitive infrastructure and environment or creativity and supportive government.
In a world where the single greatest advantage a cul ure can have is the ability to foster adaptability and adoptability, the uslim world today is dominated by a religious clergy that literally bans jtihad, reinterpretation of the principles of Islam in light of current ircumstances.
While Nayar uses the language of conomics, what he is saying in essence is that thanks to adopting a glob lization strategy India has experienced an economic revolution: s the driving force of the world economy since the mid-1970s, lobalization has become a lodestone for a wide-ranging attack cross a large expanse of the developing world for its alleged ma ign consequences.
can think of no better way to illustrate this rule than to tell the story of nother friend, Fadi Ghandour, the cofounder and C E O of Aramex, he first home-grown package delivery service in the Arab world and he first and only Arab company to be listed on the Nasdaq.
Ghandour's and Kingson's brainstorm was to approach  H E W O R L D IS F L A T merican companies, like Federal Express and Airborne Express, that id not have a Middle East presence and offer to become their local de ivery service, playing on the fact that an Arab company would know the egion and how to get around unpleasantries like Arab-Israeli clashes, the ran-Iraq war, and the American invasion of Iraq. "
s I noted earlier, many of the new middle jobs will go to people who re great synthesizersbecause the more the flattening of the world con ects all the knowledge pools together, the more new specialties will be pawned, and the more innovation will come from putting these special ies together in new and different combinations.
What if I told you, though, that Rolls-Royce doesn't even make ars anymore (that business was sold in 1972 and the brand was licensed o B M W in 1998), that 50 percent of its income comes from services, nd that in 1990 all of its employees were in Great Britain and today 40 OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ercent are based outside of the United Kingdom, integrated into a lobal operation that stretches from China to Singapore to India to Italy o Spain to Germany to Japan and up to Scandinavia?
And if you are a multiproduct company, you are probably going o have some manufacturing relationships in Malaysia and China, some esign in Taiwan, some customer support in India and the Philippines, nd possibly some engineering in Russia and the U.S." These are the socalled micromultinationals, and they are the wave of the future.
In the wake of the col apse of Enron and other corporate governance scandals, a lot more ompanies became interested in what LRN was offeringonline pro rams for companies to forge common expectations and understandings f their legal and ethical responsibilities, from the boardroom to the fac ory floor.
A young ndian engineer no longer has to stand in line outside the U.S. embassy n New Delhi and pray to win the lottery and secure a visa to America so hat he or she can move to frigid Minnesota and give up his or her native ress, native cuisine, native music, and extended familyall the things hat make up a native culture just to get a decent engineering job at M. That is a very good thing for the preservation of Indian local culture.
he kind of globalization we are talking about nowwith the nternet and the flattening of the world"is a different kind of globaliza ion than the one that is in the minds of the people who have been criti izing globalization," remarked Israeli political theorist Yaron Ezrahi.
Because the flattening F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G f the world extends free markets farther into different corners of the orld, now social entrepreneurs can leverage those markets to deliver obs, services, and profits for all kinds of people not just for the rich but lso for the poor and the aspiring middle class.
uture elections, note Rasiej and Sifry, are sure to be even further affected y the scope and reach of the Internet, "with all kinds of voter-generated ontent, citizen activism, social networks, and the power of the technol gy to force transparency in the electoral process and in government."
As a founding member and vol nteer for the U.S. Green Building Council, I founded the EED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) green uilding rating system, which due to the dedication of hun reds of volunteers like myself and tireless efforts of the USGBC taffhas become the premier green building certification sys em in the world.
Intrigued, I alled her husband, Brian, and he picked up the story: "At the end of the eriod, when all of the tests were being passed up to the front of the class oom, this student very quickly and slyly pulled out his cell phone and omehow snapped a picture of some test questions, and instantly e-mailed t to his friend who was taking the same test the next period.
My colleagues at the Times bureau informed me hat on that day the Chinese government censors were blocking SMS essages on cell phones that contained any reference to Tiananmen quare or even the numbers 6 and 4. ark Steyn, writing in the National Review (October 25, 2004), re ated a story from the London Arabic newspaper Al-Quds al-Arabi about  panic that broke out in Khartoum, Sudan, after a crazy rumor swept the ity, claiming that if an infidel shook a man's hand, that man could lose is manhood.
So the Gates Foundation placed ads on he Web and in more conventional channels across both the developed nd the developing worlds, asking scientists to respond to one big ques ion: What are the biggest problems that, if science attended to them and olved them, could most dramatically change the fate of the several bil ion people trapped in the vicious cycle of infant mortality, low life ex ectancy, and disease?
They include the following: ow to create effective single-dose vaccines that can be used soon after irth, how to prepare vaccines that do not require refrigeration, how to evelop needle-free delivery systems for vaccines, how to better under tand which immunological responses provide protective immunity, how o better control insects that transmit agents of disease, how to develop a enetic or chemical strategy to incapacitate a disease-transmitting insect opulation, how to create a full range of optimal bioavailable nutrients in HE UNFLAT WORLD  single staple plant species, and how to create immunological methods hat can cure chronic infections.
And, from the other side, it would ake the economic devastation from such a pandemic so much greater nd more sudden, because our natural response to pandemics is to put p walls and to sever connectivity and face-to-face contactsince the ovement and interaction of both people and goods is precisely what preads something like the influenza virus.
ichael T. Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease esearch and Policy and professor at the University of Minnesota's chool of Public Health, notes that the spread of the SARS (Severe Acute espiratory Syndrome) virus in 2003 demonstrated just how quickly such n infectious disease can move in a flattening world, given the speed and ensity of international air travel.
We saw how big and how an ry this group can be in the spring of 2004 Indian national elections, in hich the ruling BJP was surprisingly tossed out of officedespite having verseen a surge in India's growth ratelargely because of the discontent f rural Indian voters with the slow pace of globalization outside the gi- HE UNFLAT WORLD nt cities.
hese rural voterspeasants and farmers, who form the bulk of India s opulationjust had to spend a day in any nearby big city to see the ben fits of the flat world: the cars, the houses, the educational opportunities.
It has to be by refocusing the energies of the global populist ovement on how to improve local government, infrastructure, and ed cation in places like rural India and China, so the populations there an acquire the tools to collaborate and participate in the flat world.
The ntiglobalization movement emerged at the World Trade Organization onference in Seattle in 1999 and then spread around the world in sub equent years, usually gathering to attack meetings of the World Bank, the MF, and the G-8 industrialized nations.
inally, the fifth force in this movement was a coalition of very seri us, well-meaning, and constructive groups from environmentalists to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T rade activists to NGOs concerned with governancewho became part f the populist antiglobalization movement in the 1990s in the hopes hat they could catalyze a global discussion about how we globalize.
One of the most obvious s the festering Arab-Israeli conflict, and the Israeli occupation of Pale tinian land and East Jerusalema grievance that has a powerful emo ional hold on the Arab-Muslim imagination and has long soured elations with America and the West.
Fascism and Marxism-Leninism grew out of the rapid in ustrialization and modernization of Germany and Central Europe, here communities living in tightly bonded villages and extended fami ies suddenly got shattered and the sons and fathers went off to the urban reas to work for big industrial companies.
But unlike the Lenin sts, who wanted to install the reign of the perfect class, the working class, nd unlike Nazis, who wanted to install the reign of the perfect race, the ryan race, bin Laden and al-Zawahiri wanted to install the reign of the erfect religion.
And the problem is that so many Muslims ant both stagnation and power: they want a return to the perfection of the HE UNFLAT WORLD eventh century and to dominate the twenty-first, as they believe is the irthright of their doctrine, the last testament of God to man.
s I said, however, this frustration and humiliation are not confined to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he Islamistfringes.The reason the Islamo-Leninists have become the most nergized and pronounced opponents of globalization/Americanization nd the biggest threat to the flattening of the world today is not simply their xtraordinary violence, but also that they enjoy some passive support round the Arab-Muslim world.
ut the other reason for the passive support that the Islamo-Leninists njoyand the fact that they are able to raise so much money through harities and mosques in the Arab-Muslim world is that too many ood, decent people there feel the same frustration and tinge of humili tion that many of their most enraged youth do.
They were happy to see omeone humiliating the people and the country that they felt was hu iliating them and supporting what they saw as injustice in their orldwhether it is America's backing of Arab kings and dictators who HE UNFLAT WORLD xport oil to it or America's backing of Israel whether it does the right hings or the wrong things.
"Despite the fact that bin Laden murdered housands of innocents in the name of our religion and despite the dam ge that he has caused to Muslims everywhere, and especially to innocent uslims in the West, whose life is much better than the life of Muslims n Islamic lands, to this date not a single fatwa has been issued calling for he killing of bin Laden, on the pretext that bin Laden still proclaims there is no God other than Allah,'" Tefla wrote.
If millions of people from India, hina, Latin America, and the former Soviet Empire, who for years had een living largely outside the flat world, all start to walk onto the new flatworld platformeach with his or her own version of the American dream f owning a car, a house, a refrigerator, a microwave, and a toasterwe re, at best, going to experience a serious energy shortage.
t the business conference I was attending in Beijing, I kept hearing eferences to the Strait of Malaccathe narrow passage between Malay ia and Indonesia that is patrolled by the U.S. Navy and controls all the il tanker traffic from the Middle East to China and Japan.
It is just a small hint of the potential struggle for powerenergy owerthat could ensue if the Great American Dream and the Great hinese Dream and the Great Indian Dream and the Great Russian ream come to be seen as mutually exclusive in energy terms.
"China is following the ath of Japan and Korea," said the executive, on the condition that he nd his company not be quoted by name, "and the big question is, Can he world afford to have 1.3 billion people following that path and driv ng the same cars and using the same amount of energy?
he reluctance of the Bush team to develop such a comprehensive eo-green strategywhich would strengthen the dollar, reduce our trade eficit, make America the world leader in combating climate change, nd stimulate U.S. companies to take the lead in producing the green echnologies that the world will desperately need as China and India in ustrializehas been so irresponsible that it takes your breath away.
It will require a president and a Congress with the uts to undertake a "Green New Deal"where government's role is not unding vast projects, like the original New Deal, but seeding basic re earch, providing loan guarantees where needed, and setting standards, egulations, taxes, and incentives that will shape the market and spawn ne thousand new clean-tech companies, focused on everything from ower generation to biofuels to more efficient transportation to green uildings.
In that spirit, and again with tongue slightly in cheek,  offer the Dell Theory of Conflict Prevention, the essence of which is hat the advent and spread of just-in-time global supply chains in the flat orld are an even greater restraint on geopolitical adventurism than the ore general rising standard of living that McDonald's symbolized.
T 7hile the biggest test case of the Dell Theory is China versus  V Taiwan, the fact is that the Dell Theory has already proved itself o some degree in the case of India and Pakistan, the context in which I irst started to think about it.
Yet these mobile, self-financing mutant supply chains use all he tools of collaboration offered by the flat worlduploading to raise  H E W O R L D IS F L A T oney, to recruit followers, and to stimulate and disseminate ideas; out ourcing to train recruits; and supply-chaining to distribute the tools nd the suicide bombers to undertake operations.
If we are not going o shut down the Internet and all the other creative and collaborative ools that have flattened the world, and if we can't restrict access to them, he only thing we can do is try to influence the imagination and inten ions that people bring to them and draw from them.
In or about June 2001, in orman, Oklahoma, Zacarias Moussaoui made inquiries about starting a ropdusting company... On or about August 16, 2001, Zacarias oussaoui possessed, among other things: two knives; a pair of binocu ars; flight manuals for the Boeing 747 Model 400; a flight simulator com uter program; fighting gloves and shin guards; a piece of paper referring o a handheld Global Positioning System receiver and a camcorder; soft are that could be used to review pilot procedures for the Boeing 747  H E W O R L D IS F L A T odel 400; letters indicating that Moussaoui is a marketing consultant in he United States for Infocus Tech; a computer disk containing informa ion related to the aerial application of pesticides; and a hand-held avia ion radio."
Because only through this recognition will we begin to fo us on the truly critical issuesan effective multilateral response to eapons of mass destruction proliferation, the creation of real stakehold rs in globalization among the world's poor, the need for reform in the rab world, and a style of U.S. leadership that seeks to build our base of upport worldwide by getting more people to voluntarily sign onto our alues.
