I CYBERNETICS IN HISTORY Since the end of World War II, I have been working on the many ramifications of the theory of messages.
Hence "Cybernetics," which I derived from the Greek word kubernetes, or "steersman," the same Greek word from which we eventually derive our word "governor."
The process of receiving and of using information is the process of THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS our adjusting to the contingencies of the outer environ ment, and of our living effectively within that environ ment.
Thus, communication and control belong to the essence of man's inner life, even as they belong to his life in society.
In Gibbs' view we have a physical _ ( ' .
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY quantity which belongs not to the outside world as such, but to certain sets of possible outside worlds, and therefore to the answer to certain specific questions which we can ask concerning the outside world.
This control of a machine on the basis of its actual performance rather than its expected performance is known as feedback, and involves sen sory members which are actuated by motor members and perform the function of tell-tales or monit01's that is, of elements which indicate a performance.
It is the function of these mechanisms to control the me chanical tendency toward disorganization; in other CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY words, to produce a temporary and local reversal of the normal direction of entropy.
If the feedback system is itself controlled-if, in other words, its own entropic tendencies are checked by still other controlling mechanisms-and kept within limits suffi ciently stringent, this will not occur, and the existence of the feedback will increase the stability of perform ance of the gun.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS If I pick up my cigar, I do not will to move any specific muscles.
Modern physics, however, recognizes that the demon can only gain the information with which it opens or closes the door from something like a sense organ THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS which for these purposes is an eye.
We have encountered this problem in the past in considering viruses, which show some of the tend encies of life-to persist, to multiply, and to organize- , ' THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS but do not express these tendencies in a fully-devel oped form.
Feedback may be as simple as that of the common reflex, or it may be a higher order feedback, in which past experience is used not only to regulate specific movements, but also whole policies of be havior.
Nature offers I I I THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS resistance to decoding, but it does not show ingenuity in finding new and undecipherable methods for jam ming our communication with the outer world.
He is brought up in an atmosphere of Santa Claus; and when he learns that Santa Claus is a myth, he cries bitterly.
It is possible to believe in progress as a fact with out believing in progress as an ethical principle; but in the catechism of many Americans, the one goes with the other.
To the average American, progress means the winning of the West.
A Roman cattleman from the D acian frontier would have made quite a competent vaquero to drive longhorn steers from the plains of Texas to the terminus of the railroad, although he would have been struck with astonishment with what he found when he got there.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS When the tea and cakes were exhausted at one seat, the natural thing for the Mad Hatter and the March Hare was to move on and occupy the next seat.
We are the slaves of our technical improvement and we can no more return a New Hampshire farm to the self-con tained state in which it was maintained in 1800 than we can, by taking thought, add a cubit to our stature or, what is more to the point, diminish it.
Learning, like more primitive forms of feed back, is a process which reads differently forward and backward in time.
When in the American Revolution, orders already drawn up had failed, through carelessness, to go from England commanding a British army to march down from Canada to meet another British army marching up from New York at Saratoga, Burgoyne's forces met a catastrophic defeat which a well con ceived program of two-way communications would have avoided.
Most of us in the United States prefer to live in a moderately loose social community, in which the blocks to communication among individuals and classes are not too great.
I will not say that this ideal of communi cation is attained in the United States.
The answer is that Cybernetics takes the view that the structure of the machine or of the organism is an index of the performance that may be ex pected from it.
If these results are merely used as numerical data for the criticism of the system and its regulation, we have the simple feedback of the control engineers.
He is limited by the fact that if h e makes a rapid turn, cen trifugal force will render him unconscious; and by the other fact that the control mechanism of his plane and the course of instructions which he has received prac tically force on him certain regular habits of control which show themselves even in his evasive action.
Let us remember THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS that in the pursuit of a target as rapid as an airplane, there is not time for the computer to take out his instruments and figure where the plane is going to be.
All the figuring must be built into the gun control itself.
It has great advantag66 for the most varied problems of communication and control.
Besides these machines which work on a yes-and-no scale, there are other computing and control machines which measure rather than count.
We have already seen that these thresholds are variable with temperature, and we have THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS no reason to believe that they may not be variable with the chemistry of the blood and with many other phenomena which are not themselves originally of an all-or-none nature.
The early natural historians were the practical frontiersmen of the intellect; too TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS much under the compulsion to seize and occupy new territory to be very precise in treating the problem of explaining the new forms that they had observed.
Let us remember that these "To-whom-it-may-con cern" influences bear a certain similarity to the sort of r THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS changes in the anti-aircraft control apparatus which carry all new statistics to the instrument, rather than to those which directly carry only specific numerical data.
Language, in fact, is in one sense another name for communication itself, as well as a word used to describe the codes through which com munication takes place.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS they may share to a certain degree with the machines man has constructed.
Its actual performance of opening and closing switches, of pulling generators into phase, of controlling the How of water in sluices, and of turning the turbines on or off, may be regarded as a language in itself, with a system of probabilities of behavior given by its own history.
It apparently is built into the brain itself, that we are to have a pre - i \ TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS occupation with codes and with the sounds of speech, and that the preoccupation with codes can be extended from those dealing with speech to those that concern themselves with visual stimuli.
As my father was a very heretical philologist whose influence tended to lead philology in much the same direction as the modern influences of communication theory, I wish to continue this chapter with a few THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS amateurish reflections on the history of language and the history of our theory of language.
A book such as Ducange's Glossarium Mediae atque In fimae Latinitatis could not exist without its being clear that the roots of the Romance languages are not only in Latin, but in vulgar Latin.
not appli- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS cable.
It may be thought that the rise of the vulgar lan guages of Europe must necessarily have marked the end of the function of Latin.
That this jargon has been sanctified by his tory, so that it has become itself an object of classical education, is not relevant; for this happened after Aristotle, not contemporaneously with him.
The impor tant thing is that the Greek language of the time of Aristotle was ready to compromise with the technical jargon of a brilliant scholar, while even the English of CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY his learned and reverend successors is not willing to compromise with the similar needs of modern speech.
This distribution is very different from what will be found in an artificial language, such as Esperanto or Volapiik.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS is not the quantity of information sent that is impor tant for action, but rather the quantity of information which can penetrate into a communication and storage apparatus sufficiently to serve as the trigger for action.
Now let us consider an information system used to control the sort of electric power sub-station of which we spoke earlier in the chapter.
g6 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS ourselves.
In this way, he imagined that the various local authorities had gradually been compelled to drop their rights, or had allowed their local rights to lapse; and that the central authority of the Aerial Board of Control had taken these responsibilities over.
He does not seem to realize that where a man's word goes, and where his power of perception goes, to that point his control and in a sense his physical ex jstence is extended.
To see the greater importance of the transportation of information as compared with mere physical trans portation, let us suppose that we have an architect in Europe supervising the construction of a building in the United States.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS the memory by the organism of the effects of its past : development.
In order for this message to be significant at all, it must convey at least as much information as an entire set of the Encyclopedia Britannica.
These mean: the liberty of each human being to develop in his freedom the full TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS measure of the human possibilities embodied in him; the equality by which what is just for A and B remains just when the positions of A and B are interchanged; and a good will between man and man that knows no limits short of those of humanity itself.
Law seems to consider punishment, now as a threat to discourage other possible criminals, now as a ritual act of expiation on the part of the guilty man, now as a device for removing him from society and for protecting the latter from the danger of repeated misconduct, and noW as an agency for the social and the moral reform of the b ig t : l ) r l 1 10 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS individual.
It is a game in the full Von Neumann sense; a game in which the litigants try by methods which are limited by the code of law to obtain the judge and the jury as their partners.
This second sort of ingenuity is labeled the dis covery of a law of nature; and in the United States, as well as in many other countries with similar in dustrial practices, the legal code denies to the dis coverer any property rights in a law of nature which he may have discovered.
Information, on the other hand, cannot be conserved as easily, for as we have already seen the amount of information communicated is related to the non-addi tive quantity known as entropy and differs from it by its algebraic sign and a possible numerical factor.
He cannot place them 1 18 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS in a fireproof cabinet and gloat over them at a small dinner for a few connoisseurs, nor shut them up alto gether as private possessions.
Information is more a matter of process than of stor age.
There is no Maginot Line of the brain.
These may be due to the fact that they either are precisely those weapons which are more effe ctively employable against us than against THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS any enemy of ours, or are dangers, such as that of radio active poisoning, which are inherent in our very use of such a weapon as the atomic bomb.
At worst, as in , the silver mines of New Spain, it was done by the labor , of human slaves.
It is thus no longer necessary to control a process at high energy-levels by a mechanism in which the im portant details of control are carried out at these levels.
Here there enters the prin ciple of feedback, which we have already discussed, and which is older than its exemplification in the ship's steering engine, and is at least as old, in fact, as the governor which regulates the speed of Watt's steam THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS engine.
It is fair to say, however, that except for a considerable number of isolated examples, the industrial revolution up to the present has displaced man and the beast as a source of power, without making any great impression 1 54 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS on other human functions.
It is also possible that the actual contin gencies met in the performance of the machine may be handed over as a basis of further regulation to a new control tape constructed by the machine itself, or to a modification of the old one.
This is true, whether we consider the memory apparatus, the logical apparatus, or the arithmetical I' , , 1 56 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS subassembly.
They are also familiar in paper fac- 1 58 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS tories, which likewise produce a continuous output.
There will, of course, be trades into which the new industrial revolution will not penetrate either be cause the new control machines are not economical in industries on so small a scale as not to be able to carry the considerable capital costs involved, or because their work is so varied that a new taping will be neces sary for almost every job.
Where THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS such machines may be used, some use of machinery of judgment is not inconceivable.
We are already as far along in the process of developing a unified system of automatic control ma chines as we were in the development of radar in 1939.
TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS There is another type of human tremor which is in some ways diametrically opposite to intention tremor.
This phenomenon in man is what we have described as Parkinsonianism.
Some time ago, Professor Wiesner told me that he was interested in the possibility of constructing an aid THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS for the totally deaf, and that he would like to hear my views on the subject.
We were aware of the work that had already been done on visible speech at the Bell Telephone Laboratories, and its relation to their earlier work on the Vocoder.
We knew that the Vocoder work gave us a measure of the amount of information which it was necessary to transmit for the intelligibility of speech more favorable than that of any previous method.
The present status of our apparatus is this : the transition between the first and the new second stage is well under control, although there are certain technical difficulties still to be overcome.
Other uses of hearing are important, such as the reception of 1 70 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS the sounds of nature and the appreciation of music, but they are not so important that we should consider a person as socially deaf if he shared in the ordinary, in terpersonal communication by speech, and in no other use of hearing.
It may be used to show that if human speech is properly divided into not more than five bands, and if these are rectified so that only their form-envelopes or outer shapes are perceived, and are used to modulate quite arbitrary sounds within their ...- 1 72 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS frequency range, then if these sounds are finally added up, the original speech is recognizable as speech and almost recognizable as the speech of a particular in dividual.
Yet for beings living TIlE lillMAN USE OF lillMAN BEINGS long enough, as von Neumann has shown, it would be possible; and a game played perfectly on each side would lead, as a foregone conclusion, either always to a win for White, or always to a win for Black, or most probably always to a draw.
As an honest man, I cannot deny that a certain element 1 78 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS of ostentatious narcissism is present in me, at least.
The great book of von Neumann and Morgenstern on the Theory of Games has made a profound impression on the world, and not least in Washington.
Its real danger, however, is the quite different one that such machines, though helpless by themselves, may be used by a human being or a block of human beings to increase their control over the rest of the human race or that political leaders may attempt to control their populations by means not of machines themselves but through political techniques as narrow and in different to human possibility as if they had, in fact, been conceived mechanically.
But even without the state machine of Pere Dubar:le we are already developing new concepts of war, of economic conflict, and of propaganda on the basis of von Neumann's Theory of Games, which is itself a com municational theory, as the developments of the' 1950S have already shown.
While the philosophy behind it is probably not acceptable to our present opponents, the Communists, there are strong THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS signs that its possibilities are already being studied in Russia as well as here, and that the Russians, not con tent with accepting the theory as we have presented it, have conceivably refined it in certain important re spects.
In other words, we must know as scientists what man's nature is and what his built-in purposes are, even when we must wield this knowledge as soldiers and as statesmen; and we must know why we wish to control him.
There is one quality more important than "know-how" and we cannot accuse the United States of any undue amount of it.
I have said that the modern man, and especially the modern American, however much "know-how" he may have, has very little "know-what."
Let us remember that there are game-playing ma chines both of the Monkey's Paw type and of the type of the Bottled Djinnee.
In more usual language, both the team of communi cants and the jamming forces are at liberty to use the technique of bluffing to confound one another, and in general this technique will be used to prevent the other TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS side from being able to act on a firm knowledge of the technique of one side.
It follows almost by a syllogism that there are other professions besides that of the detective which can and do disqualify a man for the most effective scientific work, both by making him suspect nature of disingenu ousness, and by making him disingenuous in his atti- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS tude to nature and to questions about nature.
Thus it is no accident that Russia has had its Berias and that we have our McCarthys.
