Besides the electrical engineering theory of the trans mission of messages, there is a larger field which in cludes not only the study of language but the study of messages as a means of controlling machinery and society, the development of computing machines and other such automata, certain reflections upon psychol ogy and the nervous system, and a tentative new theory of scientific method.
It is the purpose of Cybernetics to de velop a language and techniques that will enable us indeed to attack the problem of control and communi cation in general, but also to find the proper repertory of ideas and techniques to classify their particular manifestations under certain concepts.
The process of receiving and of using information is the process of THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS our adjusting to the contingencies of the outer environ ment, and of our living effectively within that environ ment.
The famous experiment of Michelson and MorIey, in the nineties, was undertaken to resolve this problem, and it gave the entirely unexpected answer that there simply was no way to determine the motion of matter through the ether.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY quantity which belongs not to the outside world as such, but to certain sets of possible outside worlds, and therefore to the answer to certain specific questions which we can ask concerning the outside world.
They move in accordance with a pattern, but it is a pattern which is set in advance, and in which the past activity of the figures has practically nothing to do with the I r THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS pattern of their future activity.
But modern automatic ma chines such as the controlled missile, the proximity fuse, the automatic door opener, the control apparatus for a chemical factory, and the rest of the modern armory of automatic machines which perform military CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY or industrial functions, possess sense organs; that is, receptors for messages coming from the outside.
These are combinations, both of the data put in at the moment and of the records taken from the past stored data THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS which we call the mem01'y.
To obtain a performance as uniform as pos sible, it is customary to put into the gun a control feed back element which reads the lag of the gun behind the position it should have according to the orders given it, and which uses this difference to give the gun an extra push.
If the feedback system is itself controlled-if, in other words, its own entropic tendencies are checked by still other controlling mechanisms-and kept within limits suffi ciently stringent, this will not occur, and the existence of the feedback will increase the stability of perform ance of the gun.
We have encountered this problem in the past in considering viruses, which show some of the tend encies of life-to persist, to multiply, and to organize- , ' THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS but do not express these tendencies in a fully-devel oped form.
Factually, it asserts that the earlier advance of geographical discovery, whose inception corresponds to the beginning of modern times, is to be continued / THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS into an indefinite period of invention, of the discovery of new techniques for controlling the human environ ment.
The Hebrew prophets are far from cheerful in their evaluation of the future of mankind, or even of their chosen Israel; and the great morality play of Job, while it grants him a victory of the spirit, and while the Lord deigns to return to him his Hocks and his servants and his wives, nevertheless gives no assurance that such a 1 CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY relatively happy outcome will take place except through the arbitrariness of God.
The musket with which most of the Civil War was fought was TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS only a slight improvement over that carried at Water loo, and that in turn was nearly interchangeable with the Brown Bess of Marlborough's army in the Low Countries.
It is doubtful whether the smoothbore musket ever much exceeded in range the best of the longbows, and it is certain that it never equaled them in accuracy nor in speed of fire; yet the longbow is the almost unimproved invention of the Stone Age.
In the age of discovery Europe had become aware for the first time of the existence of great thinly-settled areas capable of taking up a population exceeding that of Europe itself; a land full of unexplored resources, not only of gold and silver but of the other commodities of commerce as well.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS When the tea and cakes were exhausted at one seat, the natural thing for the Mad Hatter and the March Hare was to move on and occupy the next seat.
Not only do messages go out controlling the motion of the tow locomotives, the opening and closing of the sluices, and the opening and closing of the gates; but the control room is full of telltales which indicate not merely that the locomotives, the sluices, and the gates have received their orders, but that they have in fact effectively carried out these orders.
The purpose of applause in the theater-and THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS it is essential-is to establish in the performer's mind some modicum of two-way communication.
On the other hand, I wish to show that the human individual, capable of vast learning and study, THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS which may occupy almost half of his life, is physically equipped, as the ant is not, for this capacity.
The answer is that Cybernetics takes the view that the structure of the machine or of the organism is an index of the performance that may be ex pected from it.
Now, as the present technique of switching generally goes, the process of reaching one of the people whom we call up four or five times a day is in no way different from the process of reaching those p eople with whom we may THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS never have a conversation.
At the beginning of World War II, the comparative inefficiency of anti-aircraft fire made it necessary to introduce apparatus which would follow the position of an airplane, compute its distance, de termine the length of time before a shell could reach it, and figure out where it would be at the end of that time.
He is limited by the fact that if h e makes a rapid turn, cen trifugal force will render him unconscious; and by the other fact that the control mechanism of his plane and the course of instructions which he has received prac tically force on him certain regular habits of control which show themselves even in his evasive action.
Let us remember THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS that in the pursuit of a target as rapid as an airplane, there is not time for the computer to take out his instruments and figure where the plane is going to be.
The problem of determining the Hight statistics of a plane from the actual observation of its Hight, and then of transforming these into rules for controlling the gun, is itself a definite and mathematical one.
We thus may construct an anti-aircraft gun which ob serves by itself the statistics concerning the motion of the target plane, which then works these into a system of control, and which finally adopts this system of con trol as a quick way for adjusting its position to the observed position and motion of the plane.
The early natural historians were the practical frontiersmen of the intellect; too TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS much under the compulsion to seize and occupy new territory to be very precise in treating the problem of explaining the new forms that they had observed.
The change in the stimulus for which a given response takes place must have some such nervous cor relate as the opening of a synaptic pathway leading to the response which would otherwise have been closed, or the closing of one which would otherwise have been open; and thus constitutes what Cybernetics calls a change in taping.
Its actual performance of opening and closing switches, of pulling generators into phase, of controlling the How of water in sluices, and of turning the turbines on or off, may be regarded as a language in itself, with a system of probabilities of behavior given by its own history.
It is clear, for example" THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS that the ear and the brain h ave an effective frequency cutoff preventing the reception of some high frequen cies which can penetrate the ear and can be trans mitted by the telephone.
This fact again is a corollary of the second law of thermodynam ics, and is necessarily true if at each stage we regard the information transmitted as the maximum infor- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS mation that could be transmitted with an appropriately coded receiving system.
As my father was a very heretical philologist whose influence tended to lead philology in much the same direction as the modern influences of communication theory, I wish to continue this chapter with a few THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS amateurish reflections on the history of language and the history of our theory of language.
Accordingly, the Bible of the Christians and the Jews, the sacred books of the Persians and the Hindus, the Buddhist scriptures, the writings of Confucius, all have their early commenta tors.
The early speculation that Hebrew was the language of man in Paradise, and that the confusion of language originated at the building of the Tower of Babel, need not interest us here as anything more than a primitive precursor of scientific thought.
When, under the advice of the much maligned Warren Hastings, the East India Company founded its School of Oriental Studies at Fort William, it was no longer possible to ignore that Greek and Latin on the one hand, and Sanskrit on the other, were cut from the same cloth.
At the beginning of the last century the work of the brothers Grimm and of the Dane, Rask, showed not only that the Teutonic languages came within the or bit of this so-called Indo-European group, but went further to make clear the linguistic relations of these languages to one another, and to a supposed distant common parent.
In the face of the existence of Mischsprachen, of lan guages such as Lingua Franca, Swahili, Yiddish, Chi nook Jargon, and even to a considerable extent English, there has been an attempt to trace each lan guage to a single legitimate ancestor, and to treat the other participants in its origin as nothing more than godparents of the newborn child.
It is scarcely until the recent work of Otto Jespersen that any considerable group of philologists have had objectivity enough to make of their science a repre sentation of language as it is actually spoken and written, rather than a copybook attempt to teach the Eskimos how to speak Eskimo, and the Chinese how to write Chinese.
During the Middle Ages Latin of a varying quality, the best of it quite acceptable to anyone but a pedant, remained the universal language of the clergy and of all learned men throughout Western Europe, even as Arabic has remained in the Moslem world down to the CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY present day.
The Moslem world, as I have said, is united by a tradition of classical Arabic, even though the majority of Moslems are not Arabic speakers and the spoken Arabic of the present day has divided itself into a number of very different dialects.
May I remark that all we possess of Aristotle is what amounts to the school notebooks of his disciples, written in one of the most crabbed technical jargons in the history of the world, and totally unintelligible to any contemporary Greek who had not been through the discipline of the Lyceum?
The impor tant thing is that the Greek language of the time of Aristotle was ready to compromise with the technical jargon of a brilliant scholar, while even the English of CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY his learned and reverend successors is not willing to compromise with the similar needs of modern speech.
With the airplane and the radio the word of the rulers extends to the ends of the earth, and very many of the factors which previously precluded a World State have been abrogated.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS is not the quantity of information sent that is impor tant for action, but rather the quantity of information which can penetrate into a communication and storage apparatus sufficiently to serve as the trigger for action.
In the most final Heaven of the Buddhists, however, the state of Nirvana, the soul loses its separate identity and is absorbed into the Great Soul of the World.
These mean: the liberty of each human being to develop in his freedom the full TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS measure of the human possibilities embodied in him; the equality by which what is just for A and B remains just when the positions of A and B are interchanged; and a good will between man and man that knows no limits short of those of humanity itself.
The judges, those to whom is confided the task of the interpretation of the law, should perform their function in such a spirit that if Judge A is replaced by Judge B , the exchange cannot be expected t o make a material change in the court's interpretation of customs and of 1 08 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS statutes.
The history of our dealings with the Indians is full of instances in point, both for the dangers of duress and the dangers of ambiguity.
From the very early times of the colonies, the Indians had neither the bulk of population nor the equality of arms to meet the whites on a fair basis, especially when the so-called land trea ties between the whites and the Indians were being n e gotiated.
Law seems to consider punishment, now as a threat to discourage other possible criminals, now as a ritual act of expiation on the part of the guilty man, now as a device for removing him from society and for protecting the latter from the danger of repeated misconduct, and noW as an agency for the social and the moral reform of the b ig t : l ) r l 1 10 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS individual.
It is a game in the full Von Neumann sense; a game in which the litigants try by methods which are limited by the code of law to obtain the judge and the jury as their partners.
On the other hand, under the impetus of Senator McCarthy and his imitators, the blind and excessive classification of military information, and the recent attacks on the State Department, we are approaching a secretive frame of mind paralleled in history only in the Venice of the Renaissance.
There the extraordinarily precise news-gathering services of the Venetian ambassadors ( which form one of our chief sources of European history ) accompanied a national jealousy of secrets, exaggerated to such an extent that the state ordered the private assassination of emigrant artisans, to maintain the monopoly of cer tain chosen arts and crafts.
This second sort of ingenuity is labeled the dis covery of a law of nature; and in the United States, as well as in many other countries with similar in dustrial practices, the legal code denies to the dis coverer any property rights in a law of nature which he may have discovered.
The stamp market, the rare book market, the market for Sandwich glass and for Duncan Phyfe furniture are all artificial, in the sense that in addition to the real pleasure which the posses sion of such an object gives to its owner, much of the value of the fac;on pertains not only to the rarity of the object itself, but to the momentary existence of an ac tive group of buyers competing for it.
It is only when the study of such an author has penetrated to a layer deeper than that which has been absorbed into the superficial cliches of the time, that THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS we can re-establish with him an informative rapport, and give him a new and fresh literary value.
England was the first country to go through a full-scale industrial revolution; and from this early age it inherited the nar row gauge of its railways, the heavy investment of its cotton mills in obsolete equipment, and the limitations of its social system, which have made the cumulative needs of the present day into an overwhelming emer gency, only to be met by what amounts to a social and industrial revolution.
That country will have the greatest security whose TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS informational and scientific situation is adequate to meet the demands that may be put on it-the country in which it is fully realized that infonnation is important as a stage in the continuous process by which we observe the outer world, and act effectively upon it.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS Without any doubt, we possess the world's most , highly developed technique of combining the efforts , of large numbers of scientists and large quantities of ; money toward the realization of a single project.
These may be due to the fact that they either are precisely those weapons which are more effe ctively employable against us than against THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS any enemy of ours, or are dangers, such as that of radio active poisoning, which are inherent in our very use of such a weapon as the atomic bomb.
For example, the concentrated effort of Oak Ridge and Los Alamos in time of war has made the question of the protection of the people of the United States, not only from the possible enemies em ploying an atomic bomb, but from the atomic radia tion of our new industry, a thing which concerns us now.
Even the new psychology of advertising and salesmanship becomes in their hands a way for obliter- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS ating the conscientious scruples of the working scien tists, and for destroying such inhibitions as they may have against rowing into this maelstrom.
It is not the question whether a show may excite a great interest in a considerable number of peo ple that interests the entrepreneur, but rather the ques tion of whether it will be unacceptable to so few that 1 32 THE lWMAN USE OF lWMAN BEINGS he can count on selling it indiscriminately to movie theaters from coast to coast.
In the firs t place, the overseas interests of England and France, unlike those of Spain, lay in high latitudes, where the advantage of a direct great-circle course  1 38 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS over an east-and-west course is most conspicuous.
There was an exploitation of the labor of children and women to an extent, and of a brutality scarcely conceivable at the present time-that is, if we forget the South African diamond mines and ignore the new industrialization of China and India and the general terms of plantation labor in almost every country.
By this, I mean that a great many of the disastrous conse quences and phases of the earlier part of the industrial revolution were not so much due to any moral obtuse ness or iniquity on the part of those concerned, as to certain technical features which were inherent in the ,early means of industrialization, and which the later THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS history of technical development has thrust more or ', less into the background.
For normal control, the ship car ried a steering engine which translated the relatively small forces of the quartermaster at the wheel into the movement of the massive rudder.
There were sporadic uses of the vacuum tube and of its sister invention, the photoelectric cell, for scan ning the products of industry; as for example, for regulating the thickness of a web coming out of a paper machine, or for inspecting the color of a can of pine- 1 48 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS apples.
Here there enters the prin ciple of feedback, which we have already discussed, and which is older than its exemplification in the ship's steering engine, and is at least as old, in fact, as the governor which regulates the speed of Watt's steam THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS engine.
There is some sort of apparatus which notes the distance between this member and the tiller; and this distance controls the admission of steam to the ports of a steam steering-engine, or some similar electrical admission in the case of an electrical steering-engine.
It is fair to say, however, that except for a considerable number of isolated examples, the industrial revolution up to the present has displaced man and the beast as a source of power, without making any great impression 1 54 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS on other human functions.
It is also possible that the actual contin gencies met in the performance of the machine may be handed over as a basis of further regulation to a new control tape constructed by the machine itself, or to a modification of the old one.
On the one hand, it receives its detailed instruc tions from elements of the nature of sense organs, such as photoelectric cells, condensers for the reading of the thickness of a web of paper, thermometers, hydrogen ion-concentration meters, and the general run of ap paratus now built by instrument companies for the manual control of industrial processes.
We shall see a process parallel to the way in which the use of atomic energy for bombs has been allowed to compromise the very necessary potentialities of the long-time use of atomic power to replace our oil and coal supplies, which are within cen- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS turies, if not decades, of utter exhaustion.
x SOME COMMUNICATION MACHINES AND THEIR FUTURE I devoted the last chapter to the problem of the in dustrial and social impact of certain control machines which are already beginning to show important pos sibilities for the replacement of human labor.
B. Wiesner of the Electron ics Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Tech nology discussed with me the possibility of constructing a tropism machine or machine with a simple fixed built-in purpose, with parts sufficiently adjustable to show the main phenomena of voluntary feedback, and of what we have just called postural feedback, and their breakdown.
There is thus a feedback dependent on the source of THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS light proceeding from the light to the photoelectric cells, and thence to the rudder control system, by which it finally regulates the direction of its own motion and changes the angle of incidence of the light.
Other uses of hearing are important, such as the reception of 1 70 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS the sounds of nature and the appreciation of music, but they are not so important that we should consider a person as socially deaf if he shared in the ordinary, in terpersonal communication by speech, and in no other use of hearing.
The precise way we do this in the apparatus we are considering is by separat ing the frequency bands of speech as in the Vocoder, and then by transmitting these different rectified bands to spatially distant tactile regions, after they have been used to modulate vibrations of frequencies easily per ceived by the skin.
In this case, the nor mal feedback in the medulla and brain stem of the healthy person will be used even in the paralytic to supply the control of his breathing.
To begin with, his evaluation of the final position after two moves would make allowances for the control of the board, for the mutual protection of the pieces, etc., as well as the number of pieces, check, and checkmate.
For outside of the very serious problems which the volume of information to be collected and to be treated rapidly THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS still put, the problems of the stability of prediction re main beyond what we can seriously dream of controlling.
Its real danger, however, is the quite different one that such machines, though helpless by themselves, may be used by a human being or a block of human beings to increase their control over the rest of the human race or that political leaders may attempt to control their populations by means not of machines themselves but through political techniques as narrow and in different to human possibility as if they had, in fact, been conceived mechanically.
But even without the state machine of Pere Dubar:le we are already developing new concepts of war, of economic conflict, and of propaganda on the basis of von Neumann's Theory of Games, which is itself a com municational theory, as the developments of the' 1950S have already shown.
While the philosophy behind it is probably not acceptable to our present opponents, the Communists, there are strong THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS signs that its possibilities are already being studied in Russia as well as here, and that the Russians, not con tent with accepting the theory as we have presented it, have conceivably refined it in certain important re spects.
There is a considerable amount of evidence, rather in deed than in words, that the Russians have supplemented this attitude to the world game by considering the psychological limits of the players and especially their fatigability as part of the game itself.
These simple and obvious truths represent the childish equivalent of the tragic view of life which the Greeks and many modern THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS Europeans possess, and which is somehow missing in this land of plenty.
In doing so, he will put himself sooner or later in the position of the father in W. W. Jacobs' The Monkey's Paw, who has wished for a hundred pounds, only to find at his door the agent of the com pany for which his son works, tendering him one hundred pounds as a consolation for his son's death at the factory.
Or again, he may do it in the way of the Arab fisherman in the One Tlwmand and One Nights, when he broke the Seal of Solomon on the lid of the bottle which contained the angry djinnee.
In the strict von Neumann theory of games this means that the speaker and listener co operate on policy in view of the assumption that the jamming agency is adopting the best policy to confuse them, again under the assumption that the speaker and the listener have been using the best policy up to the present, and so on.
In more usual language, both the team of communi cants and the jamming forces are at liberty to use the technique of bluffing to confound one another, and in general this technique will be used to prevent the other TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS side from being able to act on a firm knowledge of the technique of one side.
It follows almost by a syllogism that there are other professions besides that of the detective which can and do disqualify a man for the most effective scientific work, both by making him suspect nature of disingenu ousness, and by making him disingenuous in his atti- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS tude to nature and to questions about nature.
