Goals | Introduction Goals Language surrounds us from when we are infants, language is the predominant mode of expression at school and university, and now that we are adults, new languages are everywhere.
Modern times are polyglot times, and monoglot individuals begin to realise that speaking just one language has its disadvantages.
The Word Brain answers these questions.
The subtitle of the present guide, Fast Language Learning, may be subject to misunderstanding.
There is nothing snug and cosy about The Word Brain.
On the contrary, this short guide for adults may appear harsh and rude, and demands your determination, Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain discipline, and perseverance.
Again, you will find nothing of all this in The Word Brain.
When we later summarise how to rapidly achieve reading and comprehension skills, I will prescribe you months of lonely learning sessions with books and audio files.
If you feel scared about this perspective, consider at least reading the first chapter, Words.
Then let me briefly explain how The Word Brain came to life.
Learn a difficult language: Arabic.
After working at the University Hospitals in Bonn and Frankfurt, I published and edited a small number of books (www.HepatologyTextbook.com and www.InfluenzaReport.com, among others) and created a handful of medical websites, one of which  www.Amedeo.com  has had the chance to become a Web Classic.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Later in life, I took to the habit of learning languages by myself: Spanish in the early twenties, Italian after emigrating to Sardinia at the age of 27, Portuguese at 33 during a three-month trip to Brazil.
In between or thereafter, whenever there was the perspective of travel, I studied the basic grammar of other languages: Swedish, Dutch, Modern Greek, Turkish, Sardinian, Farsi (Iranian), Swahili, Hebrew, Hindi, Kabyle, Indonesian, Norwegian.
The Word Brain is not about counting (I, too, know Arabic.
The Word Brain is about the effort adults need to undertake to speak and understand another language.
I define speaking another language extensively.
The definition includes the ability Web: TheWordBrain.com Goals     | to read essays or newspapers to understand TV news or documentary programmes to imagine the correct spelling of words while listening to TV news or documentaries to understand everyday conversation In other words, The Word Brain describes the steps to metamorphosize yourself from a perfect illiterate to a person who has fluent hearing and reading abilities in another language.
Depending on a number of variables that I will discuss, the time estimated to accomplish your task is between one and five years.
I have condensed The Word Brain as much as possible so that you can read it in a couple of hours.
If you have to learn another language in the future, you might find some useful hints about how to streamline your project and save time.
Although it is not a treaty on neuroscience, The Word Brain introduces basic concepts of processing and storage of information in our word brain.
In the subsequent chapters, you will hear such curious advice as Start listening, go on listening, continue listening  but please dont speak too early!; you will discover some of your extraordinary reading abilities; learn how differently your brain processes spoken words and written words; see the need of sequencing speech in small slices; discover the extraordinary Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain accomplishments of your memory; and, finally, conceive a strategic plan to crack your next language as quickly and as reliably as possible.
Reading newspapers, understanding TV  the bar is high.
Lets start with the number of new words you have to feed into your brain.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | Words Words are the fuel of language and the number of words you are familiar with determines your language abilities.
This is a huge number and double what you are Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain expected to learn in 8 years at school.
In order to understand how many truly new words you will have to manage  words you have never seen before and which you cannot deduce from other languages you know  we need a short history of your linguistic abilities:  What is your native language?
Based on your answers, good teachers are able to make a reliable estimate of the number of words you must transfer into your brain.
Worstcase scenarios are languages that are completely different from any of the languages you know: for Europeans, typical examples are Hindi, Arabic, Japanese or Chinese.
The descendants of the Roman Empire  the Italians, Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | Spanish, Portuguese, French, and, to a lesser extent, Romanians  are therefore navigating in familiar waters when learning each others languages.
Once your teachers define the word quota you have to burn into your brain, the next question is: how long will it take me to learn these words? You may be surprised to know that the total study time for wiring a new word into livelong memory is around five minutes.
Children tend to have it easier because they have so-called fast-mapping abilities, a fabulous fast lane for word learning after a single exposure, which partly explains the prodigious rate at which they learn new words.
The Memory chapter shows in more detail that word learning is a result of repeated exposures over weeks and months, a succession of stations, a Via Dolorosa.
Learning is a biological process that requires new connections between brain cells, and these connections are being produced from a huge number of biochemical substances.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain At a conservative estimate of 10 words per hour, it will take you 500 hours to learn 5,000 words (French/Spanish) and 1,500 hours to learn 15,000 words (European/Arabic).
Based on the number of hours you are prepared to invest on a daily basis, your total study time can be predicted with fairly good accuracy.
Take your daily study time from the left column in Table 1.1 and pick from the appropriate column on the right side (easy language: 5,000 words; difficult language, 15,000 words) the number of months you need to complete your word training.
Table 1.1: Study time (in months)* Number of words to learn 5,000 10,000 15,000 0.5 Hours/Day 1.5 * At five days per week; figures are rounded These numbers have important implications.
First, language learning means daily learning.
I climb two flight of stairs Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | twice every day. If you are not ready for daily practise, reconsider your project.
Second, language learning is mostly a do-it-yourself job.
Be prepared to spend hundreds of hours alone with your language manuals, smartphone and dictionary.
Language learning is not a bottomless pit, but is as predictable and quantifiable as climbing a mountain in excellent weather conditions.
Some of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain friends may get to the summit in 4 hours, others in 6 hours, but nobody will do it in 30 minutes.
In Chapter 7, you will find a number of strategies to cope with hundreds of words every month.
Total workload after Chapter 1 500  1,500 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | Listening Have you recently listened to people speaking unfamiliar languages?
Alternatively, if you live in a metropolis, go down onto the streets and spot groups of animated people speaking foreign languages.
You will soon notice that humans produce continuous streams of uninterrupted speech.
The Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain same happens with bakers, taxi drivers, and hotel employees  again polenta and pea soup.
Not only do young children readily soak up any of the thousands of possible human languages, but they also learn to understand a huge variety of radically different pronunciations  mum and dad, the neighbours, the fisherman at the street corner, people speaking other dialects, stuttering infants, and toothless grandparents.
As a physiological preterm primate, your interactions with the world were pretty limited  eating, digesting, looking, and listening.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | To show the magnitude of the task you face in a new language, try to delimit the word boundaries: Figure 2.1: Sound wave pattern of  Putting structure into the porridge of sound produced by the people who inhabited your life. Delimitingwordboundariesinaspeechstreamisnoeasierthantryin gtodeterminetheminthepreviousparagraphsohowdoyounginfant scrackthesoundcodetheyperformfrequencyanalysestakeforexam plethesoundsequencewhataprettybabyyouarethroughcontinuous exposuretohumanlanguagebabblinghumansproduce10000wordsa ndmoreinasinglehourinfantsprogressivelyunderstandthatsyllabl eswhicharepartofthesamewordtendtofollowoneanotherpredicta blyprettybabywhereassyllablesthatfollowoneanotherlessfrequen tlyarewordboundariesaprettyba.
Delimiting word boundaries in a speech stream is no easier than trying to determine them in the previous paragraph.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain This type of frequency analysis is dependent on a wellfunctioning memory that accumulates an ever-growing number of words and, of course, extensive training.
Speech comprehension is therefore a triple challenge: slicing human speech into digestible units, endowing them with meaning by matching the segments with thousands of existing words stored in your brain dictionary, and, finally, doing all this without giving it a second thought.
To see what it looks like when your auditory brain cortex works at full-speed, put your brain into a PET scanner (Figure 2.2).
In my experience, it took around 1,500 to 2,000 hours of intense listening to achieve semi-perfect sequencing abilities, both in French and Italian.
Amazingly, the results were similar for Arabic, a language so totally different from everything I had learned before.
This seems counterintuitive because in Arabic, I needed to learn at least three times as many words as in Italian.
Perhaps even relatively immune to the effect Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | of ageing?
And are young children truly superior to adults in word segmenting or do they simply dedicate more time to listening than adults?
Figure 2.2 Listening to words: High activity in the auditory brain cortex.
Even if your teachers teach exclusively in the foreign language, you will rarely total more than 500 hours of attentive listening in a typical 5-year course.
Thus, you discover that your teachers were innocent  they simply did not have enough time to get you through your speech segmentation task.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain So, if private and public schools are not in a position to provide us with sufficient exposure to human speech, where can we go to get it?
Add an intense love affair, and daily listening quotas of 8, 10, or even 12 hours will soon be a reality.
As listening can easily be done in parallel to other activities  commuting, doing sport, cooking, etc.
Thereafter, you just have to change your TV habits (more about that below), and the true extra study time can be reduced to around 100 hours.
The immediate consequence is that it is imperative that your first language manual comes with an audio source (MP3, either as CD or via Internet streaming).
During the 100 hours of extra study just mentioned, listen to your audio sources.
As expected, even with the text in front of your eyes, comprehension of the audio sources is not always immediate.
In these cases, take single sentences or even single words, put them in an audio loop and listen to them 5, 10, or 15 times.
Some audio devices come with a convenient button to define the beginning and the end of the loop.
More importantly, dont feel uncomfortable if Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | you listen to your audio sources for the 54th time.
Insomnia, too, is an excellent moment for donning your earphones.
Once you have digested your first (and maybe second) language manual, you will discover that the Internet offers extraordinary tools for second-language acquisition: audio files plus transcripts.
Scientists will appreciate the excellent podcast transcripts of the journal Nature (those published before July 2014; www.Amedeo.net/s.php?s=1), the WHO (www.Amedeo.net/s.php?s=3) and the Centers for Disease Control (www.Amedeo.net/s.php?s=2) which offer top-quality audio files about progress in science and medicine.
Check www.Amedeo.net/s.php?s=4 for more websites with audio transcripts.
all this has little or no impact on your personal and Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain professional life, and watching TV is basically tantamount to killing precious life time.
To summarise: Human speech is a continuous sound stream.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening       | To ensure extensive exposure to human speech, emigrate or find surrogates for real life: 1) Language manuals + MP3s; 2) Internet audio sources + transcripts; 3) TV.
If you cannot emigrate, dissolve your training into your daily life by listening to audio files during cooking, commuting, doing sport, etc.
Unless you emigrate, speech recognition training is as lonely a task as word learning.
Again, teachers are of almost no help (see also the Teachers chapter below).
If you are an insomniac, plug your earphones in and listen to your audio material.
As you are a virgin  linguistically speaking  you might prefer to Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain stay that way for a while.
Good pronunciation comes as a bonus of patient and attentive listening.
Workload after Chapter 12 Speech-recognition training, typically 1,500 hours and more, can mostly be integrated into daily activities.
Only about 100 hours of extra study time are needed as you become familiar with one or two language manuals.
Adding these 100 hours to the initial workload defined in Chapter 1 (500 to 1,500 hours for importing 5,000 to 15,000 words into your word brain; see page 20), your total workload is now 600 to 1,600 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | Reading Ocne uopn a tmie trhee lived in a cietarn vlagile a lttile cnortuy gril, the prettseit crteuare who was eevr seen.
If you are not, understanding the previous paragraph is more challenging, because your deciphering skill depends on the number of years you have been reading English.
Each word is a pictogram like a toilet sign in airports, and slight variations of the pictogram are irrelevant for Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain comprehension.
Reading a book is like seeing a movie.
Reading only one hour every day exposes your brain to some 20,000 words, or 7 million words per year.
Well, if reading were like watching a movie, you would certainly have to absorb a huge number of new word-images  and as with listening, some segmentation is needed.
Meanwhile, non-scientists will return to first-grade spelling techniques and ask themselves Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | where the syllables start and where they end.
Remember the examples from the Words chapter (abracadabrantesque et al.)
Reading is different from listening because training your reading skills comes as a bonus of the obligatory learning of the 5,000 to 15,000 words.
Decades of reading the Latin alphabet have conditioned your brain for high-speed deciphering of words from any language that uses this alphabet, even roadblocks such as leszllplya and megfigyelkpessg.
Exactly how familiar and how tremendously important the Latin alphabet is becomes evident if you complicate things a step further and select a language with equally unfamiliar words + a different alphabet + the irritating habit of skipping half of the vowels.
The result: Arabic.
In Arabic you will discover, much to your dismay, that you need to know the function of a word within a sentence  is it a noun?
Well, thats exactly how complicated reading and learning a language is when 50 percent of the Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain vowels are left to the beginners guesswork.
Anticipate one to three years of extra study time.
(Chinese is another example, but not Russian, as this modifies only some characters.)
Imagine painting the faade of a building while standing on a solid scaffold  the Latin alphabet is exactly this solid scaffold.
Just to make sure that you are not left with any false delusions, add the following facts: a) written Arabic is spoken nowhere except on TV and at meetings or presentations; b) in order to speak everyday Arabic you have to learn additional country dialects which in practise amounts to learning another language (like learning Italian once you have learned Spanish); c) in Arabic-speaking countries, there is less opportunity to visit provinces and cities with the fascination and vibrations that inspire dreams of fabulous 6-month fullimmersion experiences typical in Tuscany, Dordogne, Seville, Berlin, Edinburgh, Freiburg, Orgosolo, Amsterdam, Stockholm, or Lisbon  and you swiftly realise that you need to have pretty good reasons to start learning Arabic.
I recommend that you start studying classical language manuals.
Among the dozens of existing manuals, only a few are outstanding, and selecting good manuals is like crossing a minefield.
In particular, make sure that the manual has word lists and comes with audio files on a CD-ROM or on the internet.
Personally, I prefer books without pictures and drawings because words are all you need (check Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | www.TheWordBrain.com/BookRecommendations.
As with audio files, be prepared for repetitive learning cycles.
You will soon find out that reading is easier than listening, because it does not require high-speed processing of several words per second; instead, while deciphering a text, you can take all the time you need until you understand everything  lingering on single words, going back and forth through a sentence, leaping between paragraphs.
Later, you will discover that words can be divided into three great areas: 1) Language of science, documentaries, and media; 2) Language of prose; 3) Colloquial language (comic strips, etc.).
Buy it soon and mark the pages that Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain correspond to the individual letters (see Figure 3.1).
Arabic dictionary, 2250 g. Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | Figure 3.2: Working with dictionaries, highlighting consulted words.
But... dont neglect the daily listening training prescribed in the previous chapter!
Eye-ear dissociation.
Inappropriate training of the auditory brain cortex (see the previous Listening chapter).
Training the visual brain areas at the back of the head (see Figure 3.3) has little Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain influence on the performance of the auditory brain areas.
In the Speaking chapter below, you will find yet another construction site.
Figure 3.3: Reading words: High activity in the visual brain cortex.
These skills are of no use for languages with different writing systems such as Arabic or Chinese.
After finishing your first language manuals, start reading articles or books that you would normally read in your native language.
The last three chapters  Words, Listening, Reading  may suggest that language learning can be done without teachers.
As Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | a matter of fact, for the most time-intensive tasks, such as word learning and speech recognition, teachers are of little help.
Grammar is the collection of these rules.
Fortunately, the number of grammar rules is limited, and if you have some experience with grammar, you could also decide to go on your own.
For the present chapter, we just need to book 100 hours for the text study of one or two language manuals.
Your total workload is now 700 to 1,700 hours Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | Teachers Everyone agrees that there are good physicians and bad physicians.
If you book a vacation to attend English classes in private schools in London or French classes in Paris or Spanish classes in Seville, the odds are substantial that your teachers will have a perfect knowledge of one, but only one language  their own  and will themselves never have been through the rough process of mastering Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain another language.
The risk of encountering such monoglot teachers is particularly high in English-speaking countries.
While in other professionals, for example real estate agent, woodcutter, or mortician, a lack of enthusiasm may be irrelevant, in teaching it is not.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | In order to get a clearer picture of language teaching and, consequently, of how to avoid bored and boring teachers, lets address a list of the services teachers should provide.
As we have seen in the Words chapter, vocabulary training is inherently a lonely job because nobody except yourself can transfer thousands of words into your brain.
As a consequence, audio CDs, audio books, internet news, and TV have supplanted teachers as prime speech sources.
The impact of teachers on the third, fourth and fifth tasks  speaking, reading, and writing  is equally limited.
Writing comes as a bonus of reading, reading as a bonus of word learning, and as you will see in the Speaking chapter, correct pronunciation comes as a bonus of hundreds of hours of listening.
Grammar is therefore the only domain where language teachers will continue to play a certain role in the future.
Grammar  the climax of excruciatingly boring language lessons, and a torture for teens?
Grammar consists of a fairly limited number of rules that tell you how to modify words and how to arrange them to form correct and beautiful sentences.
can be outsourced to pure memory exercises, which reduces the duration of pure grammar lessons even Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain further.
Verbs usually denote action (learn, listen, read), occurrence (forget, decompose), or a state of being (love, exist).
To English native-speakers, they do not seem impressive because, with the exception of a small number of irregular verbs such as go-wentgone, write-wrote-written, etc., the English verb system is disarmingly simple.
All we can press out of to want are two variations, wants and wanted.
Fortunately, there are strict rules which govern verbs (a discipline which grammarians call conjugation); and with the exception of some irregular verbs, all variations of a verb can be Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | easily deduced.
Unfortunately, easily does not mean fast, and lack of speed is disastrous for fluent understanding and fluent speaking.
The same repetitive training as in word training: repeated exposure, and heavy nailing.
Search the Internet for free software.
), and a limited number of pronouns (I, you, he, she, me, him, her, my, your, his; to name only a few);  the order in which to arrange the words in a sentence;  how to count and to ask questions;  how to localise things in time and space.
Your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain native language is by far the best tool for grasping and understanding new concepts.
As I had just developed a small piece of software on the mythical Commodore 64 (see the subsequent Internet release at www.Poliglottus.com), I was happy to test it on a complaisant guinea pig.
The experiment nicely showed the feasibility of a fast introduction to grammar, and also opened the perspective of reading newspapers or magazines, which is clearly more enjoyable and motivating than reading language manuals.
Depending on your previous exposure to your native and subsequent languages, your coach will prepare an individual time schedule for your project; recommend books, podcasts, audio books, and broadcasts; provide the first round of grammar; advise you on how to manage your daily word quota; teach you how to check that new Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | words have arrived in your long-term memory; and demonstrate common pronunciation pitfalls.
Grammar is not a black hole.
The number of problems you need to resolve is finite.
| The Word Brain Opt for the coach model and limit the number of lessons.
Learning, listening, reading  hundreds of hours, thousands of words.
Speaking is fundamental to humans.
Your total workload is now 800 to 1,800 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | Speaking The day you utter your first words in a new language is not always a happy day.
From what we saw in the Listening chapter, part of the solution was to postpone speech, and to just listen to the sounds of the world.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Anatomy and physiology conspired.
These structures amplify the sounds, and transduce them to electrical signals for the brain where speech segmentation and interpretation immediately ensue.
In comparison, speaking requires sophisticated mechanics.
In fact, only at around the age of ten do they start speaking like adults (Figure 5.1).
Figure 5.1: Pronouncing words: High activity in the precentral motor cortex.
The disparity between good language comprehension and poor language production usually persists Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | throughout a lifetime.
Speaking skills have another disturbing characteristic: they are subject to heavy erosion.
Stop speaking a second language for a decade or more, and even simple words such as Goodbye are suddenly irretrievable.
At the same time, listening and reading skills are hardly impaired.
The speaking abilities, on the contrary, would need continuous stimulation to be maintained.
Unless you are incorrigibly logorrheic, listening is the predominant function mode of your word brain.
As a result of years of listening, the part of your word brain that processes sounds is better trained than the part that produces speech.
You know hundreds or thousands of words from listening to priests, rabbis, and imams, but, again, you would not want to use them yourself because, as a scientist, you feel that God and the gods exist because our ancestors had the wisdom to create them.
This list can go on and on, including Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain people from different professions, geographical regions, age groups, etc.
How would you value listening skills with respect to speaking skills?
In the Listening chapter, I recommended that you observe a few months of mystical silence.
Repeating the lessons of your language manuals will take you some weeks.
Thereafter, use the same procedure  listening to and reproducing speech with a onesecond interval  with sentences from other sources such as podcasts, audio books, or TV.
In the beginning, real-life speech Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | will be so fast that you will reproduce only fragments of sentences.
I suggested that you repeat the sentences of language manuals, TV, and audio books.
Translations are risky for a language novice because they generate a large number of errors.
That is, of course, the end of the dream of speaking another language.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain They vary from individual to individual and comprise a certain sense of comedy and self-mockery; or, in some cases, the determination to break with suffocating families and to betray the family language; or simply semi-schizophrenic prospecting of imaginary variants of yourself.
I assume that you are willing to pay the price, so that your speaking skills will gradually improve and accelerate.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | With so much information to be crammed into your brain, you might wonder how memory works.
Workload after Chapter 15 Due to heavy exposure to human speech during your CD and/or TV training (see Chapter 2), once you start speaking, progress will be fast.
Your total workload is now 850 to 1,850 hours Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | Memory In your native language, your brain recognises  and endows with meaning  any conceivable subset of 50,000+ words within fractions of a second.
Imagine that, during your first trip to Paris, a friendly local takes you on a two-hour stroll from Notre Dame to the Louvre, then northwards up to the SacrCur, and, finally, down to Pigalle.
If I put you back at Notre Dame a few months later, you would probably find your way to Pigalle alone, recalling places, streets, crossroads, shops, and buildings.
It does so because glass is woven into your brain in many different ways: you have a mental image of a glass; you Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain have a memory trace for the spoken word; you have a memory trace for the written word; you know that the word has 5 letters, that it starts with a g and ends with an s; you have a motor recipe for pronouncing the word; and, on demand, you can recall hundreds of memories associated with the word  glasses raised to celebrate births, marriages, and anniversaries, or a glass smashed against a wall.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | To manage word webs  and other tasks, of course  your brain relies on complex and compact machinery.
The resulting picture is majestic: one billion synaptic connections in a single cubic millimetre of specialised brain Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain tissue, up to 1000 trillion (1015) in a human brain.
One thousand TeraSynapses  that is the number of stars in ten thousand Milky Ways.
The rate of spine erosion is astonishing.
However, at Day 31, you might not perform much better than the memory pioneers more than 100 Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | years ago.
Brain physiology isnt prone to instant word learning.
In order to protect young spines from erosion, schedule multiple training sessions.
At a subsequent stage, a word would be on the tip of your tongue, yet decline to come out.
Forgetting curve.
Adapted from Hermann Ebbinghaus, Memory: a contribution to experimental psychology, 1885/1913.
The vast majority  Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain alas!
Memorys suspicious gatekeepers want convincing evidence that a word deserves residence in lifelong memory.
Take comfort from the idea that subsequent learning rounds require less time and produce better results, allowing the learning sessions to be spaced out.
Learning curve (red), constructed from truncated forgetting curves.
Dark blue: Initial decline in memory performance.
Green: Repetition putting the retention rate back to 100 percent.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | Figure 6.4 illustrates these spaced repetitions and where they will take you.
We realise that the word learning is hopelessly inadequate to describe what you are going to do.
Lets say nailing.
The definition of nailing includes the three steps of learning, repeating and controlling.
The pre-existing webs of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain word brain are a unique support for nailing new words.
Table 6.1 Example of a word list for Germans wanting to nail Italian words Italian German amare lieben la pace der Frieden odiare hassen la corruzione die Korruption la morte der Tod il cavaliere der Reiter la gioia die Freude la gente die Leute *** The nailing curve in Figure 6.4 is an approximation, because memory performance varies between individuals.
Every human brain is as unique as a human face, and differences in brain structure due to genetic variation, intrauterine conditions (exposure to tobacco, drugs, and alcohol), or environmental factors after birth, can affect learning abilities.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | Instead of comparing yourself to other people, focus on yourself.
Lets await further research before making recommendations on the subject.
Later in life, job and family reduce available study time.
Stupidly, memory performance declines too, first imperceptibly, and after 50, undeniably.
Acute Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain alcohol intoxication (black-out) is fatal for memory, not to mention chronic abuse (alcohol dementia).
Alcohol, though, is a minor problem compared to a more widespread abuse: distraction.
If you repeatedly subtract a single-digit number from a larger number directly after one of your nailing sessions, you will see that your memory is impaired for the 3 to 5 most recently nailed words.
Opening social network accounts, reading incoherent information from disparate sources, writing short messages, participating in nonsense quizzes, listening simultaneously to music, downloading videos or doing whatever else you can imagine  such acrobatic multitasking is heavy stuff for delicate infant spines.
Do precious bits of memory get lost in the cold spaces of the endlessly anonymous Internet?
For a brief discussion of psychostimulant drugs, see the Appendix on page 79.
Walking in the open air, listening to birds and Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | enjoying the dance of butterflies?
Even if education at school and university is about facts and concepts, word learning is a huge burden of formal education.
!, saying, in essence, that children have pretty few things to care about except listening and talking.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Lets summarise: 1.
After your nailing sessions, relax and dont engage in multitasking activities.
Teach your children and grandchildren the following motto, by Eric Kandel, Nobel Laureate: Studying well is, without a doubt, the best cognitive enhancer for those capable of learning (Kandel 2007).
Nailing is about strategies to cope with the huge number of words you have to burn into your brain.
Workload after Chapter 16 Your total workload is still 850 to 1,850 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Nailing | Nailing You are now ready for take off.
The sheer volume of this task  500 to 1,500 hours  may surprise those who had a nave or romantic perception of speaking other peoples tongues.
If you are learning just for fun and want to limit daily learning to one hour a day, avoid languages with heavy word loads.
For people from Western Europe these are, for example, Russian, Turkish, Arabic, Chinese, or other African and Asian languages.
Every language is within your reach because your daily work schedule includes 3 hours of word nailing and intense reading plus hours of listening to audio sources.
Nobody wants language teachers who are not in command of what they teach, and anything less than 5 Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain hours of daily study is unacceptable.
However, in everyday life, and in particular over periods of months, nailing 50 words per day is a terrific challenge.
First, you need to recognise the words that your auditory brain cortex will soon be able to cut out from spoken language (see Chapter 2, Listening).
Second, word nailing accelerates your transition from an illiterate to a literate person and brings you closer to the most pressing short-term objective: reading!
Reading is total immersion par excellence.
Just to make sure that we understand each other: I dont find word nailing thrilling and I can immediately name dozens of activities I would prefer to do.
However, in the early stages of Web: TheWordBrain.com Nailing | language learning, there isnt any alternative for people who like it fast and efficient.
Remember Chapter 1: The number of words you are familiar with determines your language abilities.
Nailing can be divided into three distinct activities: learning words, repeating words, and controlling words.
Remember the forgetting curve of the Memory chapter.
As learning is nothing and recalling is everything, the second pillar of word nailing is repetition.
The third pillar of nailing is control.
Very young children ask their family for help, and a grandmother might interrogate her grandson, Young boy, please tell me what acar means. But what is practical at an artisan level is impractical for Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain the mass digestion of 5,000 to 15,000 words, and you wouldnt want to bother your grandmother, mother, wife, daughter or granddaughter for months or years on end.
For an overview on this topic, please see www.TheWordBrain.com/NailingSystems.
The prevention: nail words five days a week and stop nailing at weekends.
The second problem is more severe: lack of words.
Good language manuals usually present around 2,000 words  that is far short of your final word score of 515,000.
This is a miserable situation, because you are too good to continue working with manuals, but not good enough for reading essays, newspapers or novels.
There is one acceptable solution: nailing carefully selected word compilations that are grouped by topic and divided into basic and advanced vocabulary.
Good compilations present around 7,000 words and offer free pronunciation audio files (see www.TheWordBrain.com/BookRecommendations).
Define the number of pages you will nail every day and start ploughing your way through them.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Nailing | While pioneering the world of words, you will one day have the curiosity to open a 200-page grammar book.
To your satisfaction, you will realise that daily listening to your audio sources (remember the manual CDs, TV programmes and audio books of the Listening chapter) has paved the way to understanding grammar.
As your word repertoire increases and the number of missing words diminishes, you will one day discover how exciting it is to work on essays, newspapers or novels.
At this point, you can even slow down your nailing rhythm, but only on one condition: that you extract from your reading sources double the number of words that is on your nailing schedule.
At this double-strength dosage, searching the words and writing them down will suffice and dispense you of nailing them in sensu strictu.
Your final workload is between 1,000 and 2,000 hours Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Web: TheWordBrain.com Epilogue | Epilogue We have reached the end of our journey.
After visiting your colossal lifelong memory, your breathtaking speech segmentation skills, your frantic reading speed, and your pronunciation acrobatics  all unique on Earth  lets sit down for a moment.
Germans will appreciate that Turkish is as beautiful as German; French people will be delighted that Arabic is as expressive and gentle as French; and Italians will be pleased to discover that Albanian is as subtle and amusing as Italian.
Success is determined by the number of hours people are ready to invest.
Just imagine yourself in an intense love affair, spending weeks and months in close symbiosis, exposed to a single linguistic source, discussing the world from dusk to Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain dawn, and all this submerged in memory-stimulating emotions, supplemented with memory-boosting physical activity.
In fact, they have shaped my life through an uninterrupted chain of 40 years that links my early Latin experiments to The Word Brain.
The textbook triggered the construction of www.Amedeo.com that, in turn, provided the funding for a 24month Arabic sabbatical.
And struggling with Arabic taught me fundamental lessons for writing this guide.
Languages are formidable windows to the beauties and mysteries of the human odyssey.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Web: TheWordBrain.com Appendix | Appendix Psychostimulant drugs have been used by a certain number of students on university campuses around the world.
Brain doping is not altogether new in academia.
About 20 percent indicated that they had used Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain drugs to stimulate concentration or memory.
Methylphenidate was the most popular drug (62% of the participants reported taking these drugs), followed by modafinil (44%), beta blockers such as propranolol (15%) and adderall.
