Goals | Introduction Goals Language surrounds us from when we are infants, language is the predominant mode of expression at school and university, and now that we are adults, new languages are everywhere.
The subtitle of the present guide, Fast Language Learning, may be subject to misunderstanding.
Again, you will find nothing of all this in The Word Brain.
When we later summarise how to rapidly achieve reading and comprehension skills, I will prescribe you months of lonely learning sessions with books and audio files.
Learn a difficult language: Arabic.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Later in life, I took to the habit of learning languages by myself: Spanish in the early twenties, Italian after emigrating to Sardinia at the age of 27, Portuguese at 33 during a three-month trip to Brazil.
The Word Brain is not about counting (I, too, know Arabic.
The Word Brain is about the effort adults need to undertake to speak and understand another language.
I define speaking another language extensively.
The definition includes the ability Web: TheWordBrain.com Goals     | to read essays or newspapers to understand TV news or documentary programmes to imagine the correct spelling of words while listening to TV news or documentaries to understand everyday conversation In other words, The Word Brain describes the steps to metamorphosize yourself from a perfect illiterate to a person who has fluent hearing and reading abilities in another language.
I have condensed The Word Brain as much as possible so that you can read it in a couple of hours.
If you have to learn another language in the future, you might find some useful hints about how to streamline your project and save time.
; you will discover some of your extraordinary reading abilities; learn how differently your brain processes spoken words and written words; see the need of sequencing speech in small slices; discover the extraordinary Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain accomplishments of your memory; and, finally, conceive a strategic plan to crack your next language as quickly and as reliably as possible.
Reading newspapers, understanding TV  the bar is high.
Lets start with the number of new words you have to feed into your brain.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | Words Words are the fuel of language and the number of words you are familiar with determines your language abilities.
This is a huge number and double what you are Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain expected to learn in 8 years at school.
In order to understand how many truly new words you will have to manage  words you have never seen before and which you cannot deduce from other languages you know  we need a short history of your linguistic abilities:  What is your native language?
Worstcase scenarios are languages that are completely different from any of the languages you know: for Europeans, typical examples are Hindi, Arabic, Japanese or Chinese.
Once your teachers define the word quota you have to burn into your brain, the next question is: how long will it take me to learn these words?
You may be surprised to know that the total study time for wiring a new word into livelong memory is around five minutes.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain At a conservative estimate of 10 words per hour, it will take you 500 hours to learn 5,000 words (French/Spanish) and 1,500 hours to learn 15,000 words (European/Arabic).
Based on the number of hours you are prepared to invest on a daily basis, your total study time can be predicted with fairly good accuracy.
First, language learning means daily learning.
Some of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain friends may get to the summit in 4 hours, others in 6 hours, but nobody will do it in 30 minutes.
Total workload after Chapter 1 500  1,500 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | Listening Have you recently listened to people speaking unfamiliar languages?
You will soon notice that humans produce continuous streams of uninterrupted speech.
This seems counterintuitive because in Arabic, I needed to learn at least three times as many words as in Italian.
And are young children truly superior to adults in word segmenting or do they simply dedicate more time to listening than adults?
Figure 2.2 Listening to words: High activity in the auditory brain cortex.
Even if your teachers teach exclusively in the foreign language, you will rarely total more than 500 hours of attentive listening in a typical 5-year course.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain So, if private and public schools are not in a position to provide us with sufficient exposure to human speech, where can we go to get it?
In these cases, take single sentences or even single words, put them in an audio loop and listen to them 5, 10, or 15 times.
More importantly, dont feel uncomfortable if Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | you listen to your audio sources for the 54th time.
To summarise: Human speech is a continuous sound stream.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening       | To ensure extensive exposure to human speech, emigrate or find surrogates for real life: 1) Language manuals + MP3s; 2) Internet audio sources + transcripts; 3) TV.
If you cannot emigrate, dissolve your training into your daily life by listening to audio files during cooking, commuting, doing sport, etc.
Unless you emigrate, speech recognition training is as lonely a task as word learning.
Workload after Chapter 12 Speech-recognition training, typically 1,500 hours and more, can mostly be integrated into daily activities.
Only about 100 hours of extra study time are needed as you become familiar with one or two language manuals.
If you are not, understanding the previous paragraph is more challenging, because your deciphering skill depends on the number of years you have been reading English.
Well, if reading were like watching a movie, you would certainly have to absorb a huge number of new word-images  and as with listening, some segmentation is needed.
Remember the examples from the Words chapter (abracadabrantesque et al.) Reading is different from listening because training your reading skills comes as a bonus of the obligatory learning of the 5,000 to 15,000 words.
The result: Arabic.
In Arabic you will discover, much to your dismay, that you need to know the function of a word within a sentence  is it a noun?
Just to make sure that you are not left with any false delusions, add the following facts: a) written Arabic is spoken nowhere except on TV and at meetings or presentations; b) in order to speak everyday Arabic you have to learn additional country dialects which in practise amounts to learning another language (like learning Italian once you have learned Spanish); c) in Arabic-speaking countries, there is less opportunity to visit provinces and cities with the fascination and vibrations that inspire dreams of fabulous 6-month fullimmersion experiences typical in Tuscany, Dordogne, Seville, Berlin, Edinburgh, Freiburg, Orgosolo, Amsterdam, Stockholm, or Lisbon  and you swiftly realise that you need to have pretty good reasons to start learning Arabic.
In particular, make sure that the manual has word lists and comes with audio files on a CD-ROM or on the internet.
As with audio files, be prepared for repetitive learning cycles.
You will soon find out that reading is easier than listening, because it does not require high-speed processing of several words per second; instead, while deciphering a text, you can take all the time you need until you understand everything  lingering on single words, going back and forth through a sentence, leaping between paragraphs.
Inappropriate training of the auditory brain cortex (see the previous Listening chapter).
These skills are of no use for languages with different writing systems such as Arabic or Chinese.
After finishing your first language manuals, start reading articles or books that you would normally read in your native language.
As Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | a matter of fact, for the most time-intensive tasks, such as word learning and speech recognition, teachers are of little help.
Fortunately, the number of grammar rules is limited, and if you have some experience with grammar, you could also decide to go on your own.
For the present chapter, we just need to book 100 hours for the text study of one or two language manuals.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | In order to get a clearer picture of language teaching and, consequently, of how to avoid bored and boring teachers, lets address a list of the services teachers should provide.
As we have seen in the Words chapter, vocabulary training is inherently a lonely job because nobody except yourself can transfer thousands of words into your brain.
Writing comes as a bonus of reading, reading as a bonus of word learning, and as you will see in the Speaking chapter, correct pronunciation comes as a bonus of hundreds of hours of listening.
Grammar  the climax of excruciatingly boring language lessons, and a torture for teens?
The same repetitive training as in word training: repeated exposure, and heavy nailing.
), and a limited number of pronouns (I, you, he, she, me, him, her, my, your, his; to name only a few);  the order in which to arrange the words in a sentence;  how to count and to ask questions;  how to localise things in time and space.
Your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain native language is by far the best tool for grasping and understanding new concepts.
Depending on your previous exposure to your native and subsequent languages, your coach will prepare an individual time schedule for your project; recommend books, podcasts, audio books, and broadcasts; provide the first round of grammar; advise you on how to manage your daily word quota; teach you how to check that new Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | words have arrived in your long-term memory; and demonstrate common pronunciation pitfalls.
Learning, listening, reading  hundreds of hours, thousands of words.
Your total workload is now 800 to 1,800 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | Speaking The day you utter your first words in a new language is not always a happy day.
In fact, only at around the age of ten do they start speaking like adults (Figure 5.1).
Speaking skills have another disturbing characteristic: they are subject to heavy erosion.
Stop speaking a second language for a decade or more, and even simple words such as Goodbye are suddenly irretrievable.
Repeating the lessons of your language manuals will take you some weeks.
In the beginning, real-life speech Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | will be so fast that you will reproduce only fragments of sentences.
I suggested that you repeat the sentences of language manuals, TV, and audio books.
That is, of course, the end of the dream of speaking another language.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | With so much information to be crammed into your brain, you might wonder how memory works.
Workload after Chapter 15 Due to heavy exposure to human speech during your CD and/or TV training (see Chapter 2), once you start speaking, progress will be fast.
Your total workload is now 850 to 1,850 hours Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | Memory In your native language, your brain recognises  and endows with meaning  any conceivable subset of 50,000+ words within fractions of a second.
It does so because glass is woven into your brain in many different ways: you have a mental image of a glass; you Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain have a memory trace for the spoken word; you have a memory trace for the written word; you know that the word has 5 letters, that it starts with a g and ends with an s; you have a motor recipe for pronouncing the word; and, on demand, you can recall hundreds of memories associated with the word  glasses raised to celebrate births, marriages, and anniversaries, or a glass smashed against a wall.
At a subsequent stage, a word would be on the tip of your tongue, yet decline to come out.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | Figure 6.4 illustrates these spaced repetitions and where they will take you.
The pre-existing webs of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain word brain are a unique support for nailing new words.
If you repeatedly subtract a single-digit number from a larger number directly after one of your nailing sessions, you will see that your memory is impaired for the 3 to 5 most recently nailed words.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Lets summarise: 1.
Nailing is about strategies to cope with the huge number of words you have to burn into your brain.
Workload after Chapter 16 Your total workload is still 850 to 1,850 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Nailing | Nailing You are now ready for take off.
Every language is within your reach because your daily work schedule includes 3 hours of word nailing and intense reading plus hours of listening to audio sources.
First, you need to recognise the words that your auditory brain cortex will soon be able to cut out from spoken language (see Chapter 2, Listening).
Just to make sure that we understand each other: I dont find word nailing thrilling and I can immediately name dozens of activities I would prefer to do.
Remember Chapter 1: The number of words you are familiar with determines your language abilities.
Nailing can be divided into three distinct activities: learning words, repeating words, and controlling words.
As learning is nothing and recalling is everything, the second pillar of word nailing is repetition.
For an overview on this topic, please see www.TheWordBrain.com/NailingSystems.
The second problem is more severe: lack of words.
Good language manuals usually present around 2,000 words  that is far short of your final word score of 515,000.
This is a miserable situation, because you are too good to continue working with manuals, but not good enough for reading essays, newspapers or novels.
Good compilations present around 7,000 words and offer free pronunciation audio files (see www.TheWordBrain.com/BookRecommendations).
Define the number of pages you will nail every day and start ploughing your way through them.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Nailing | While pioneering the world of words, you will one day have the curiosity to open a 200-page grammar book.
To your satisfaction, you will realise that daily listening to your audio sources (remember the manual CDs, TV programmes and audio books of the Listening chapter) has paved the way to understanding grammar.
At this point, you can even slow down your nailing rhythm, but only on one condition: that you extract from your reading sources double the number of words that is on your nailing schedule.
Germans will appreciate that Turkish is as beautiful as German; French people will be delighted that Arabic is as expressive and gentle as French; and Italians will be pleased to discover that Albanian is as subtle and amusing as Italian.
And struggling with Arabic taught me fundamental lessons for writing this guide.
