As a result, it is shaped rather like a diamond, bounded on two sides by arms of the Indian Ocean (the Arabian Sea on the west, and the Bay of Bengal on the east), and on the other two by mountain ranges that were thrown up by the collision with Asia.
Inside of these highlands come the basins of two great rivers, the Indus and the Ganges, huge flat expanses of land separated from each other by the Thar or Great Indian Desert and a range of low hills.
The Indus rises in Tibet.
(Since 1947, Punjab has been divided between India and Pakistan.)  The Ganges and its tributary the Yamuna originate in Himalayan glaciers and, after running through north India, flow into the Bay of Bengal through a huge delta, two thirds of which now lies in Bangladesh.
The rather lower Eastern Ghats separate the plateau from the coastal plain on the Bay of Bengal.
Most of the peninsula’s other rivers (which include the Godavari and the Krishna) begin in the Western Ghats and run eastward into the Bay of Bengal.
Then comes the southwest monsoon, moisture-bearing winds that blow off the Indian Ocean in two branches; one heads eastward from the Arabian Sea, the other northward from the Bay of Bengal, until they merge over the Gangetic Plain.
(This is only one symptom of the effects on wildlife of the spread of human settlement over the last century, despite the efforts of a long-established conservation movement.)  Other fauna include cats and dogs, foxes and jackals, rhinocer-oses, mongooses, deer, birds ranging from flamingos to pheasants, and freshwater and sea fish.
” Almost alone in the developing world, India has been a democracy since its independence from colonial rule.
Elections to the lower house of the federal parliament and the state legislatures are held regularly.
Nevertheless, it looks as if (for the time being) federal politics in India have settled down to a two-party system, based on the Bharatiya Janata Party or BJP, and the Indian National Congress (Indira) or Congress (I).
With smaller affiliated parties, the BJP and Congress (I) both have support across much of the country, and they may alternate in power for some time to come.
The current leader of the BJP is the prime minister of India, Atal Bihari Vajpayee; Congress (I) is headed by Sonia Gandhi, the Italian-born widow of the former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi.
Another 15 to 20 million Indian expatriates and people of Indian ancestry live in other countries—businessmen and workers in the Arab states of the Middle East; the descendants of Indian plantation laborers in the former British colonies of Fiji, Mauritius, Trinidad and Tobago, and Guyana; and emigrants who since the nineteenth century have settled in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, and Australia.
Hinduism and Islam together account for 93 percent of the population, and India’s other religions include Christianity, Sikhism, Buddhism, and Jainism.
There are also small (and declining) numbers of Jews and Zoroastrians.
The Dravidian languages are unique to the Indian subcontinent.
Hindi, an Indo-European tongue, is the most widely spoken language in South Asia.
These figures are somewhat misleading, however, as the name “Hindi” is used in two senses.
The same dialect gave rise to Urdu, typically associated with Muslims, which is the official language of the Muslim country of Pakistan and is also spoken by 51 million Indians.
Colloquial standard Hindi and Urdu are identical, or nearly so.
The forms taught in schools and used in government may be quite different, however, for Hindi draws new vocabulary from the ancient Sanskrit language, which also supplies its script, whereas Urdu uses Persian and Arabic for both new words and its alphabet.
Among the other major languages of India are Bengali (82 million speakers in India) and Marathi (74 million), both from the Indo-European family; and the Dravidian languages Telugu (78 million) and Tamil (63 million).
Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Oriya, Punjabi, and Assamese are each the mother tongue of millions of people.
(The British author Sir V.S.
Naipaul, winner of the 2001 Nobel Prize in Literature, is of Indian descent, but he was born in Trinidad.) Farming is by far the largest single occupation in India, and in 1995, 73 percent of the population was rural.
Industrialization has contributed to urbanization, and over a quarter of all Indians live in cities.
These include Delhi, of which the capital New Delhi is a part, with 7.2 million people in 1991; the ports of Greater Bombay (9.9 million), Calcutta (4.39 million), and Madras (3.84 million) (these are now officially called Mumbai, Kolkata, and Chennai, respectively, but the older English names are retained in this book); the high technology centers of Bangalore (3.3 million) and Hyderabad (3.1 million); and the industrial city of Ahmedabad (2.9 million).
Predictions that recent economic changes would give them jobs in, for example, computer data entry have proved only partly correct.
Poverty is greater for some regions and people than for others.
There are 160 million members of “Scheduled Castes,” commonly called Untouchables in the West, who historically formed the lowest division of Hindu society.
Then come 140 million Indians belonging to “Scheduled Tribes”—until recently these people, known as Tribals, lived in forests and remote areas, as hunters and gatherers or shifting cultivators.
Finally, 230 million Hindus are included in the “Other Backward Classes,” which traditionally ranked immediately above Untouchables.
By and large, social and economic conditions for SCs, STs, and OBCs (as they are called) lag behind those of the communities that make up the bulk of the rural elite and urban middle class.
Although India has a vigorous women’s movement, and it is almost forty years since the country’s first female prime minister took office, women form another disadvantaged group.
Low levels of education have certainly held back the country’s economic growth.
The country has produced several great filmmakers, of whom the director Satyajit Ray (winner of an Academy Award for lifetime achievement in 1992) was the most celebrated.
On a more popular level, there is the Bombay-based “Bollywood” film industry, which helps make India the largest producer of movies in the world.
In 2001, Bollywood released a blockbuster movie called Lagaan.
The film contains the typical Bollywood mixture of fights (including martial arts battles inspired by Hong Kong movies), love scenes, interludes of song and dance, and a melodramatic plot.
The movie reminds us that Indians combine a love of Bollywood and cricket with an awareness of their past.
The most important craftsmen of all were toolmakers, who after 4300 bce began to make tools out of copper, alongside the stone that had been used since the arrival of humans in the subcontinent.
The inhabitants of some remote tracts (called Tribals in modern India) continued to live as hunters and gatherers until the twentieth century, supplementing their diet through shifting cultivation.
Village settlements gradually spread across South Asia, however.
About 3200 bce, village settlements began to appear in the valleys of the Indus and the Sarasvati, two great rivers that flowed through western South Asia from the Himalayas to the Arabian Sea.
Between 2600 and 2500 bce, craftsmen in the Indus and Sarasvati valleys began to work bronze, which is a harder metal than copper.
People learned how to write, although it is unknown whether they invented writing on their own or acquired it from elsewhere.
Today, they are often called the Harappans, from Harappa, the modern name of one of their principal cities.
It centered on the Indus and the Sarasvati, in the modern Pakistani provinces of Sindh and Punjab, but it covered most of what is now Pakistan and much of northwestern India.
Our knowledge of the Harappans therefore depends almost entirely on archeological finds.
For example, some scholars say that the Harappans lived under a centralized government of priests who lived at the cities of Harappa in the north and Mohenjo Daro in the south; others believe that each of the half dozen major Harappan cities was independent and run by merchants.
However, archeology does tell us that the Harappans’ houses were built of bricks (in standard sizes) and connected to underground sewers that carried away waste.
Unlike other ancient peoples, the Harappans did not construct ornate palaces or temples, although large buildings that were presumably used for governmental or religious purposes stood on a walled platform beside each city.
The figurines provide a clue about Harappan religion, as the discovery of numerous female figures and phallic symbols may mean that the Harappans worshipped fertility deities.
We also know that trade and manufacturing were central to the lives of the Harappans.
This shows that the Harappans traded with the Near East, although it is unknown how significant this commerce was to their economy.
Of course, not all Harappans were merchants or craftsmen.
The Harappans thereafter lived in small communities.
The Harappans must have been hit by a disaster, but scholars cannot agree on what happened.
It has been suggested that the land along the lower Indus became waterlogged; and shifts in the earth’s crust, and perhaps also sedimentation, diverted the headwaters of the Sarasvati to other rivers between 2500 and 1700 bce.
The once-mighty Sarasvati shrank, shifted its course, and dried up altogether about 1300 bce.
This meant that the Indus and Sarasvati regions could no longer support large populations.
As a result, after abandoning their cities, the Harappans also more or less deserted their heartland.
The collapse of urban civilization must have been traumatic for the Harappans, whose way of doing things no longer worked.
Indians who followed these practices and spoke this language called themselves Aryans, or “ones to be respected.” It is often said that the Aryans were immigrants to South Asia.
Their language, which we sometimes call Vedic, belongs to the same Indo-European linguistic family as English, and we know that the Indo-European languages originated on the steppes of modern Ukraine, Russia, and Kazakhstan.
Yet there is no evidence that the Aryans ever lived anywhere except India.
One explanation is that before or during the days of the Harappan urban civilization, speakers of what became the Vedic language made their way to South Asia.
Because we do not know what the language of the Harappans was, it is possible that some or all of them spoke Vedic during the urban phase of their civilization.
The Vedic-speakers and their Harappan subjects became the first Aryans.
Something made Aryan culture attractive to Harappans, and it spread rapidly among them.
Our knowledge of this culture comes from the Rig Veda, a collection of 1,028 hymns, ballads, and songs that were apparently composed over many centuries between 2000 and 1000 bce.
Three other works are grouped with the Rig Veda to form the Samhitas, or collections: the Sama Veda, poems from the Rig Veda in a different order; the Yajur Veda, instructions for priests; and the Atharva Veda, magic spells.
The Samhitas were very holy to the Aryans.
The Rig Veda tells us that the Aryans were grouped into independent tribes.
Cattle herding was the most prestigious occupation among the Aryans, and cows formed the basis of their wealth.
Within each tribe, the Rajanyas (later called Kshatriyas), or warriors and herdsmen, dominated the more numerous Vaishyas (peasants) and craftsmen; the latter included bronzesmiths who made tools and weapons, and the makers of the warriors’ chariots.
The Rig Veda describes the Dasas as black, which some scholars believe means they were darker in complexion than the Aryans.
Others point out that the difference between the Dasas and Aryans seems to have been cultural rather than racial, and that the Vedic word for “black” often merely suggests that something is bad.
The main gods of the Aryans were male.
They included Indra, god of war and weather, who led the Aryans in battle.
By 1000 bce, the eastward migration of Aryan tribes, and the adoption of Aryan ways by the inhabitants of north India, had brought the Aryan world to the Ganges River.
It then spread eastward, across the Gangetic plain; southward into Madhya Pradesh; and probably northward into the upper Indus Valley and Nepal.
Land therefore replaced cattle as the basis of wealth among the Aryans.
Some scholars believe that iron tools were crucial to the Aryan movement across the Gangetic plain, arguing that such tools made it possible to clear the plain’s forests and to cultivate its heavy black soil.
In kingdoms, the chief became a king; he inherited his position and was consecrated by Brahmins in a ritual that had not existed at the time of the Rig Veda.
The ancestors of the current prime minister of India, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, were Brahmins who performed the Vajapeya, a sacrifice that rejuvenated an old king.
The kings of Magadha, in what is now the Indian state of Bihar, were particularly powerful thanks to their control of trade on the Ganges and of iron deposits.
Trade was made easier when coins were introduced in South Asia around 400 bce.
The Vedic language had changed greatly, both with the passage of time and as it was learned by people who spoke other tongues.
The changes took different forms in different places and eventually produced several distinct new languages, called Prakrits (natural).
The Vedic language remained in use in the Brahminical religion and was learned by Brahmins.
It was now called Sanskrit (refined).
Sanskrit was apparently never written at this stage, and the new scripts were used exclusively to write Prakrits.
However, the Brahmins continued to compose sacred literature in Sanskrit, which they passed on orally.
But the Brahminical religion was not static.
In the Rig Veda, souls of good people spend eternity in the World of the Fathers, and souls of bad people in the House of Clay.
The notions of karma and reincarnation have been central to many Indian religions ever since.
This understanding is explained in two Sanskrit works, the Aranyakas and the Upanishads, completed between 700 and 500 bce.
The Upanishads say that everything—space, gods, living beings—emerged from a substance called Brahman (not to be confused with the Brahmins), which continues to exist in all of them.
Another theory connects the new teachings with economic change: Newly wealthy merchants resented the wastefulness of Brahminical sacrifices and sought alternative means of salvation.
In any case, the belief in rebirth and escape became so widespread that the Brahmins accepted the Aranyakas and the Upanishads alongside the Samhitas and the Brahmanas as part of their scriptures, which are collectively called the Vedas.
(The term Vedas is sometimes more specifically applied to the Samhitas.) The authors of the Aranyakas and Upanishads represent a first wave of religious speculation in the Aryan world.
The best known teacher of this second wave was Siddhartha Gautama, called Buddha (the Enlightened One), who founded Buddhism.
The Buddhist scriptures contain stories about the life and teachings of Buddha, but in most cases their authenticity is doubtful.
It is not even certain when Buddha lived; Buddhist sources place his death around 483 bce, but many scholars now believe that a date between 378 and 358 bce is nearer the truth.
Similarly, it is unclear what Buddha actually taught.
The only stable thing is Nirvana, which is similar to the state that followers of the Upanishads reach when they realize that everything is Brahman.
Buddha’s most dedicated followers formed an order of monks and nuns, who gave all or part of their lives to preaching and to monastic devotion.
Another great religious teacher was Vardhamana, called Mahavira (Great Hero), the founder of the Jain religion.
The life and teachings of Mahavira are as uncertain as those of Buddha.
According to the Jain scriptures, Mahavira was a contemporary of Buddha.
A man named Chandragupta Maurya, and his Brahmin adviser who is called Kautilya, Chanakya, or Vishnugupta, apparently took advantage of the disorder that followed the Macedonian withdrawal to seize territory in Punjab.
From this base, they moved eastward, and, about 325 or 321 bce, defeated the king of Magadha.
Chandragupta founded the Mauryan dynasty of Magadha.
Chandragupta ruled Magadha until about 297 bce, when his son Bindusara became king.
Bindusara probably conquered territory in the vast Deccan plateau of peninsular India (the modern states of Maharashtra, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh).
The next king was his son Ashoka, one of greatest monarchs in the history of India.
Thanks to the conquests of previous kings of Magadha, Ashoka ruled a huge empire, extending from Afghanistan to Karnataka, and from Gujarat to Kalinga on the Bay of Bengal, even if he did not (as is sometimes said) rule the whole subcontinent.
Kalinga played a pivotal role in Ashoka’s life, as eight years after he became king, he subjugated the region in a bloody war.
Ashoka claimed to have been transformed by remorse over the loss of life in Kalinga.
Ashoka was the first known ruler in South Asia to set up inscriptions, texts carved in stone and publicly displayed.
His inscriptions, which are found all over India, include a pillar at Sarnath, where Buddha is said to have preached his first sermon.
Thanks to his inscriptions, we know more about Ashoka than any previous Indian king.
The inscriptions suggest that Ashoka was a devout Buddhist.
But despite what has sometimes been said, Ashoka’s personal Buddhist beliefs seem to have been distinct from the ethical policy that he adopted after the Kalinga war.
It is likely that the policy of dhamma agreed with Ashoka’s own beliefs, but it was also politically useful: the king probably hoped it would bridge the many divisions (religious, linguistic, economic, cultural) among his subjects with an ideology that almost everyone could accept, all under his leadership.
Besides Ashoka’s inscriptions, we have two major sources of information about Mauryan India.
One is the fragments of a book by Megasthenes, a Greek ambassador to Chandragupta’s court.
The other source is a Sanskrit book called Arthashastra, which is said to have been written by Chandragupta’s adviser Kautilya.
The existing version of Arthashastra was edited 500 years after Kautilya’s time, but many scholars believe it contains passages by Kautilya, along with later additions.
Kautilya supposedly wrote Arthashastra to show Chandragupta how to rule Magadha.
The book contains information on Mauryan government, although it is unclear how much of it is what Kautilya (or later authors) wanted and how far it reflects the way things really were.
Whether this was actually done or not, we know that Ashoka ruled through a large body of paid bureaucrats.
The majority of the population of Mauryan India was rural.
From before the time of the Mauryas, the principal tax in India was the land revenue, later called the lagaan, which was collected at a rate of between one sixth and one third the value of the crop.
By the time of Chandragupta, cities existed in the old Aryan world of north India, and probably also in the Deccan.
Elsewhere, the Mauryas may have established new cities, for by the end of the dynasty, urban settlements existed in all parts of India except the extreme south.
Nevertheless, outside of the Gangetic plain, Mauryan cities fall into distinct clusters.
These were apparently separated from one another by regions inhabited by Tribals, where the Mauryas may have only controlled the roads linking the urbanized areas.
Mauryan India had an extensive trade with the Mediterranean world.
Merchants had used writing for several centuries before the accession of Ashoka, and it was now employed by the government as well.
The language of administration was Magadhi, the Prakrit spoken in Magadha.
There is little evidence that Sanskrit was written before Mauryan times, but Arthashastra is in Sanskrit, and it is difficult to believe that it was handed down orally.
This suggests that Brahmins like Kautilya now wrote in Sanskrit, most likely in the Brahmi script that was already used for Prakrits.
The greatest Mauryan city was the capital, Pataliputra, in the modern state of Bihar.
In Pataliputra, archeologists have found a pillared hall, apparently built by Chandragupta, which is the oldest known stone building in India.
In keeping with his Buddhist leanings, Ashoka built at Buddhist holy places.
The Mauryan period seems to mark the beginning of Buddhist construction in permanent materials.
Ashoka died about 235 bce.
The Mauryan empire began to disintegrate almost immediately, showing that dhamma was insufficient to hold together so vast a territory.
The decline has been connected with economic decay, poor communications, problems in managing the bureaucracy, or war.
About 185 bce, the last Mauryan king of Magadha was overthrown, but the Mauryas had played a key role in the development of South Asia.
By bringing Gangetic civilization to more of India than ever before, they created lasting cultural and economic ties over much of the country, particularly among the urban areas.
India was politically divided after the death of Ashoka, but cities and the Gangetic civilization (which now becomes Classical Indian civilization) continued to spread, and trade grew steadily.
INDIA AFTER THE MAURYAS After the Mauryas, the social and economic center of India shifted from the Gangetic plain to the northwest and the south.
The northwest was repeatedly conquered by foreigners who adopted Indian culture and religious beliefs—Greeks from Afghanistan, Parthians from Iran, and Shakas and Kushanas from Central Asia.
The greatest Kushana king, Kanishka, ruled much of Central Asia, and northern India at least to the eastern frontiers of Uttar Pradesh, if not beyond.
The wealth of the Kushanas was based on trade.
Thanks to their control of Central Asia, the Kushanas were able to tax traders on the Silk Road, the overland trade route from China to the Roman Empire, which was then at the peak of its importance.
Kanishka was a patron of Buddhism, which about this time spread along the trade routes from India into Central Asia.
At the end of the first century bce, sculptors at Mathura in the upper Gangetic plain borrowed Greco-Roman and other elements from the northwest and apparently produced the first statues of Buddha (until then, depicting him had been regarded as sacrilege).
Gangetic civilization spread in the Deccan during and particularly after the Mauryan period.
To this day, the Deccan marks the southern limit of languages derived from Sanskrit: The inhabitants of Maharashtra adopted Prakrit languages (which became modern Marathi), whereas those of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka did not.
The greatest post-Mauryan dynasty of the Deccan was that of the Satavahanas or Andhras, from the first century bce to the mid-third century ce or later.
The Satavahanas were apparently of Tribal origin, but they adopted Gangetic culture.
They fostered the Brahminical religion and the Prakrit and Sanskrit languages.
After the Satavahanas, the Deccan was divided into smaller kingdoms.
The Tamil country was not ruled by Ashoka, but it had friendly relations with him, and by Mauryan times Buddhist and Jain ascetics traveled in the area.
The main source of our knowledge of early Tamil history is the Shangam literature, a collection of heroic poems that were probably composed orally between the first and third centuries ce.
THE END OF ANCIENT INDIA After the Kushanas, north India seems to have broken into small kingdoms and oligarchies.
In the fourth century ce, it was reunited by the Gupta kings, the greatest of whom, Chandra Gupta II (c.
It was temporarily reunited by a king named Harshavardhana (606–647), whose death in 647 is often regarded as marking the end of ancient India.
By the sixth century, there were two major Tamil dynasties, the Pallavas and the Pandyas.
By Gupta times, the Prakrits were evolving into the modern languages of northern and central India, while the Dravidian tongues of the south were becoming modern Telugu, Kannada, Tamil, and Malayalam.
However, the most striking linguistic development in India after the Mauryas was the revival of Sanskrit.
By Gupta times, educated men learned Sanskrit as a matter of course, and the ancient language had replaced Prakrits on inscriptions.
Several reasons have been suggested for the increasing use of Sanskrit.
Or perhaps the languages spoken in different parts of India had become so diverse that communication was impossible, and Sanskrit (already known by priests) provided a solution.
In any case, the widespread use of Sanskrit made possible the development of a rich Sanskrit literature.
Its most famous examples are two poems, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, which were revised and added to over many centuries until they reached their present forms in the first millennium ce.
The Mahabharata is the longest single poem in the world, and tells the story of a war between two sets of cousins, the Kauravas and the Pandavas.
The Ramayana is the story of Rama, king of Kosala, and his faithful wife Sita.
Literature was not the only interest of the educated classes of ancient India.
BUDDHISM AND HINDUISM Probably thanks to Ashoka, Buddhism spread across India after the Mauryas.
It has been suggested that this doctrine was borrowed from Christianity.
Buddhists who believed this teaching called it the Mahayana, or Great Vehicle to Nirvana, and they referred to traditional Buddhism as the Hinayana, or Lesser Vehicle.
By the time of the Guptas, Mahayana had replaced Hinayana as the dominant form of Buddhism in India.
Vajrayana Buddhists used magic, called the thunderbolt, to maintain the goodwill of a pantheon of goddesses.
It is sometimes said that during the first millennium ce, the old Brahminical religion won back the allegiance of Indians whose ancestors had lapsed into other faiths.
It would be more correct to say that in this period the Brahminical religion merged with folk beliefs, regional traditions, and elements of Buddhism, Jainism, and other religions to form a new faith.
The term Hindu was not used in India until long after this period, but it is convenient to refer to this new faith as Hinduism.
Hinduism is now the religion of 81 percent of the population of India, or 814 million people, and 16 million in Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Hinduism has no religious leadership with authority over all believers, and no single set of beliefs.
Nevertheless, most of the many varieties of Hinduism share certain tenets.
Chief among them is the notion of karma, which entered the Brahminical religion at the time of the Upanishads: Every deed that we perform determines what sort of body our souls will be reborn in after our current life ends.
Most modern Hindus adhere to the Upanishadic doctrine that one may escape rebirth by recognizing the identity of the human soul with the universal essence of Brahman.
This, however, is difficult to achieve, and Hindus therefore usually try to live their lives as best they can, so as to be born in a better situation in their next incarnation.
Devotional practices existed among some north Indian followers of the Brahminical religion by 100 bce.
As the use of the term God suggests, there was a tendency toward monotheism among Hindus.
Most educated Hindus came to regard one of two deities as the basic form of God, with the other divine beings as manifestations that He assumes for special circumstances.
These two deities are Vishnu, a minor god in the Rig Veda, and Shiva, a fertility god whom Hindus identify with the Rig Vedic god Rudra.
Most Hindus continue to concentrate on either Vishnu or Shiva, however, and there are only two temples dedicated to Brahma in India today.
Devotees of Vishnu often worship him in one of the forms that he is said to have taken to come down to earth, notably Krishna (a character in the Mahabharata) and Rama (the hero of the Ramayana).
Some Hindus do not believe in any God, and look instead to Rita, the Rig Vedic law of the universe.
The worship of the Mother Goddess is strong in some parts of India, particularly the state of West Bengal.
Other Hindus venerate holy men, such as Sai Baba of Shirdi, who died in 1917.
The many sacred rivers and places of Hinduism include the Ganges river, and holy places that were destinations for pilgrims by Gupta times.
These include the shrines of Vishnu (in his form of a deity called Jagannath) at Puri in Orissa; of Meenakshi the Mother Goddess at Madurai in Tamil Nadu; and of Shiva at Amarnath in Kashmir.
The reasons for this are debated; Hindus say it is because the cow represents the Mother.
Hindus worship both at home and at a temple.
The Brahminical religion does not seem to have used temples before the second century bce, but by Gupta times, India was covered with Hindu temples, each usually dedicated to a particular deity.
The basic structure of temples has been unchanged since the sixth century ce, although there are differences between north and south Indian styles of architecture.
These include the ancient Vedas, from the Rig Veda to the Upanishads, but most Hindus believe that the main message of the Scriptures is that outlined by Vishnu in his guise as Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita, a section of the Mahabharata.
Castes are ranked, and the higher the caste, the purer it is in religious terms.
Many Hindus believe that a person’s caste in this life is determined by his or her conduct in a preceding one.
It is often said that the caste system came into being to maintain the supremacy of the Aryans over other Indians with the Aryans assigning themselves to the higher castes and everyone else to the lower.
This assumes that the Aryans were a separate ethnic group, and it has been seen that this assumption is questionable.1 It also confuses caste with varna.
The varnas were the four categories of ancient Aryan society— Brahmins, or priests; Kshatriyas, or warriors; Vaishyas, or peasants; and Shudras, or people who had not willingly become Aryans.
It is not known exactly how varna functioned among the Aryans.
By this time, the Aryans were divided into both varnas (perhaps only on religious occasions) and jatis or groups of people who were related by blood.
Perhaps sometimes, occupational groups became more and more exclusive until they were castes; and as Aryan culture spread across India, Tribals and others were incorporated as new castes.
The caste system apparently did not reach its classic form until the thirteenth century ce or later, and it has continuously evolved since then.
By several centuries bce, there was a new group of castes at the bottom of society, the Untouchables, who were considered so polluting that they could not draw water from communal wells, enter temples, and so forth.
Often, Untouchables were originally people whose work was regarded as very degrading.
For a Hindu, breaking caste rules is a sin against dharma, the same word as Ashoka’s policy dhamma.
In Hinduism, it refers both to the Hindu religion itself and to the laws that tell humans how to act.
The idea of Stages of Life (ashramas) teaches that a man’s life should be divided into four parts, with different responsibilities at each: After initiation into the Hindu community, he is a student (studying the Vedas, and perhaps other subjects too); after marriage, he is a householder; when his grandchildren are born, he retires to the forest to meditate and perform penance; and when he no longer wants any material things, he gives up all and wanders till he dies.
Aryan women of the three higher varnas originally studied the Vedas, which made them full participants in religious life.
Devotional Hinduism spread through India during the first millennium ce, probably because it offered a spiritual comfort missing from Jainism and Buddhism.
Jainism began to decline in the fourth century ce, and today there are a mere 4 million Jains in India.
Whatever the truth of a legend that the Apostle Thomas preached in India, we know that by the sixth century there were Christians in Kerala on the southwest coast.
A thousand years later, the Portuguese converted many Hindus on the west coast (especially in Goa) to Roman Catholicism, and in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries Protestant missionaries made further converts, especially in northeastern India.
Today, there are 23 million Christians in India, forming 2.3 percent of the population.
Merchants were probably also responsible for introducing Judaism and Zoroastrianism to the west coast of India, which in the seventh century had its first encounters with a faith that had a profound impact on the subsequent history of the subcontinent.
This being said, Indian and American geneticists recently released a study asserting that the paternal ancestors of modern upper-caste Hindus have genetic patterns characteristic of Europeans, whereas those of the lower castes do not.
If this is true, it means that the higher castes are descended from European men, which seems to support theories that the Aryans were immigrants to South Asia and that the upper castes are their descendants.
3 Religion, Trade, and Conquest ISLAM In the last chapter, it was suggested that the death of King Harshavardhana in 647 may be taken as the end of the ancient period of Indian history.
Nevertheless, during the first half of the seventh century, a chain of events began that had momentous effects on India— so momentous that, in retrospect, Harshavardhana’s reign does seem to constitute a turning point.
Harshavardhana may not even have been aware of these events, which began at Mecca in western Arabia, 2,500 miles from his kingdom.
In 610, four years after Harshavardhana came to the throne, a Meccan trader named Muhammad began to receive what his followers believe were visits from the archangel Gabriel.
Muhammad had been chosen as the last prophet, and he was to ensure that the word of God was preserved correctly.
The heart of the divine message, which Muhammad’s followers recorded in the book called the Quran, is that humans must worship God alone and surrender themselves to Him.
The religion that was revealed to Muhammad was therefore called Islam, “submission,” and those who followed it Muslims, “those who submit.” Muhammad preached God’s message and acquired a growing number of followers.
He instructed Muslims to carry out a constant struggle (jihad) to please God and spread His word, promising them the rewards of heaven if they did so.
In 622, Muhammad moved from Mecca to the town of Medina, where he built the first mosque, or Muslim place of worship.
He also organized a government and an army, and in 630 he returned to Mecca and captured it from its non-Muslim rulers.
Most Muslims accepted a man named Abu Bakr as their new religious leader and secular ruler, and Abu Bakr became the first khalifa, or successor, of Muhammad.
EARLY MEDIEVAL INDIA By this time, there were four broad political and cultural regions in South Asia: the East, comprising Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, and Orissa; the North, the upper and central Gangetic plain; the peninsular Deccan; and the Tamil country of the far south.
Occasionally, an overlord such as Harshavardhana extended his power outside of his own region, but such supremacy was never more than temporary.
Religious rituals that emphasized this aspect of kingship—whether Hindu, Jain, or Buddhist—played a prominent role in most kingdoms.
Kings distributed gifts to nobles, Brahmin priests, and temples in return for their participation in these rituals and their loyalty.
Indian notions of kingship, social organization, and religious practice continued to spread into Tribal areas, and Tribals were absorbed into Indian society.
Other times, Tribal leaders refashioned themselves as Hindu kings, as chieftains in the south had done during and after the time of the Mauryas.
Of the four regions of South Asia, Bengal had been the easternmost province of the Mauryas and the Guptas.
Like other Indian monarchs, kings in Bengal granted land to Brahmins.
As they became rice-growing peasants, the Tribals adopted the language that became modern Bengali, and their beliefs were assimiliated to Hinduism or Buddhism.
The Pala kings of Bengal (c.
750–1161) were generous patrons of Buddhism, and the greatest of them, Dharmapala (c.
Dharmapala’s principal rivals were the Gurjara-Pratiharas, the leading dynasty of the early medieval North, who originated in Rajasthan and were the strongest kings in India in the early and mid-ninth century.
Perhaps as early as the days of the Gurjara-Pratiharas, or perhaps not until the fifteenth century, the incorporation of Tribal areas into the greater Indian world led to the formation of a new caste in North India.
Its members, the Rajputs, were apparently descended from the founders of Hindu colonies in Tribal areas.
Over several centuries, Rajputs of disparate origins came to regard themselves as a caste.
They ranged from true kings, especially in Rajasthan and Gujarat, through local chieftains, down to village headmen.
Till the twentieth century, the Rajputs dominated much of Rajasthan, Gujarat, and the central and upper Gangetic plain.
To strengthen their authority, kings in the south granted land in Tribal areas to Brahmins and temples, with much the same effects as in Bengal.
The Rashtrakuta kings of the Deccan (743– 974) campaigned in the Tamil country and the North, and in the ninth century succeeded the Gurjara-Pratiharas as the principal Indian dynasts.
In the Tamil country, a dynasty called the Cholas subjugated the Pallava and Pandya kings in the late ninth century.
A hundred years later, the Cholas became the leading monarchs of the subcontinent.
The Cholas presided over the flowering of classical Tamil culture.
Trade was a major source of wealth for all the great kingdoms of India.
Trade brought colonies of foreign merchants to all the ports of India.
In some areas, Hindus increasingly left sea travel to foreigners, and by the twelfth century there was a widespread belief among many Hindus that foreign travel brought religious impurity.
The Rashtrakutas controlled the west coast of India, and their participation in the Gulf trade made them wealthy and powerful.
At the same time, trade with Southeast Asia grew, and preeminence passed from the Rashtrakutas to the Cholas of southeastern India.
The Mappila Muslims of south India claim descent from these Arab traders and their Indian wives.
Some Indians converted to Islam, and Hindu kings in south India from the Cholas onward often hired Muslim mercenaries.
It was ruled by a Brahmin king, and its people included both Hindus and Buddhists.
According to the Quran, Muslims may forcibly convert adherents of polytheistic religions to Islam.
The first conquered peoples of the Arab empire, however, were mostly Jews and Christians.
Islam teaches that Judaism and Christianity were founded by authentic Prophets and are therefore legitimate faiths, even if their followers have distorted God’s word.
Jews and Christians under Muslim rule were accorded the status of dhimmis, nonbelievers who were allowed to practice their religions.
They could not be compelled to serve in the army as Muslims were.
The official religion of the Sasanian empire of Iran was Zoroastrianism.
Muslim theologians justified this on the grounds that, although Islam does not recognize Zoroaster as a Prophet, his followers are like Jews and Christians in that they are monotheistic and have a holy book.
With the conquest of Sindh, large numbers of Hindus and Buddhists came under Muslim rule, and the category of dhimmi was further enlarged to accommodate them.
Nevertheless, though Muslims were prepared to tol-erate nonbelievers as dhimmis, Muhammad had declared the worship of images to be a grave sin.
Sultans in Iran often used slaves as advisers and military officers, on the assumption that a master could count on the loyalty of his slaves.
At the same time, free Turkish nomads entered Iran, became Muslims, and founded dynasties of their own.
Sultan Mahmud (997–1030) expanded the Ghaznawid territories to the west and east.
Like the Arabs in Sindh, the Ghaznawid sultans recognized the Hindus under their rule as dhimmis.
The raids destabilized the North and East, and the Gurjara-Pratiharas ended after Mahmud sacked their capital Kanauj in 1019.
Among the new dynasties that arose from the wreckage were the Gaharwars in Kanauj, and the Senas in Bengal (c. 1097–1223).
The Ghaznawids were eventually conquered by the Ghauris, a people from central Afghanistan who had been converted to Islam by Mahmud.
In the twelfth century, the Ghauris made themselves the rulers of all Afghanistan.
The Ghauri ruler Muizz ud-Din Muhammad (1173–1206) subjugated modern Pakistan.
At this time, three Hindu kings were warring for supremacy in North India: Prithviraj Chauhan, Jaychand Gaharwar, and Parmal Chandel.
In 1192, Muizz ud-Din and his mounted Turkish slave archers defeated Prithviraj.
By 1206, a chain of Ghauri forts extended from the Afghan border to northwestern Bengal and ensured the submission of the Hindu kings of North India to their new overlord Muizz ud-Din.
One of the slaves, Qutb ud-Din Aybeg, made himself ruler of Lahore, now the largest city of northern Pakistan.
Aybeg died in 1210, when his own slave Shams ud-Din Iltutmish established himself at the city of Delhi.
Delhi, which had been part of the kingdom of Prithviraj Chauhan, was an economic and administrative center but had never before been the capital of a major state.
Iltutmish apparently chose it as his seat because it was a central point in North India.
Delhi has been one of the principal cities of India ever since.
Iltutmish defeated other Muslim rulers in Pakistan, North India, and Bengal, and forced many Hindu kings into submission.
He was the first ruler of the Delhi sultanate, which for 200 years was the leading—and often the only—Muslim-ruled state in India.
Iltutmish’s Shamsid dynasty (1210–1266) set a pattern for the Delhi sultanate.
Iltutmish died in 1236.
Over the next ten years, his nobles installed and then overthrew four Shamsids.
The most noteworthy of them was Iltutmish’s daughter Raziyya (1236–1240).
Raziyya was a capable ruler but was deposed by the nobles after only four years.
The main external threat to the sultanate came from the Mongols.
In 1206, the Mongol ruler Genghis Khan began a campaign to subjugate the entire world.
He did not, however, attack Iltutmish, who may have forestalled him by recognizing Mongol supremacy.
In the late 1230s, Genghis Khan’s son Ögödei conquered Afghanistan, acquiring a frontier with the Delhi sultanate.
He captured Lahore, and the Mongols soon seized most of Pakistan.
By the mid-1240s, whatever arrangements Iltutmish had made had broken down, and there were annual Mongol incursions into North India.
The Shamsids were succeeded by the Ghiyasids (1266–1290).
The first monarch of the new dynasty, Iltutmish’s slave Baha ud-Din Balaban, restored order in the Delhi sultanate.
The Mongol attacks continued, however, and in 1285, Balaban’s eldest son Muhammad was killed in battle against the Mongols.
Balaban himself died two years later.
Jalal ud-Din came from the Khalaj people of Afghanistan, and founded the Khalji dynasty (1290–1320).
He dispatched his nephew Ala ud-Din on a great raid through south India.
Ala ud-Din returned to Delhi victorious, murdered his uncle, and became sultan (1296–1316).
As ruler, Ala ud-Din both repelled Mongol invasions and continued his campaigns within India.
Between 1299 and 1305, he secured the submission of Hindu kings in Gujarat, Rajasthan, and Central India, and he apparently tightened the sultan’s control in the region east of Delhi where petty kings had hitherto enjoyed considerable autonomy.
In 1307, his general Malik Kafur, a Hindu convert to Islam, launched a second great expedition to the south, which ended in the defeat of all the major kings of the Deccan and the Tamil country.
Sultans, in India and elsewhere, often paid their civil and military officials with iqtas, the right to taxes from a given region.
Ala ud-Din feared that his muqtas might use their holdings as territorial bases from which to challenge his authority.
If he was to keep his army content with cash wages, however, Ala ud-Din had to ensure that the cost of living remained low.
Ala ud-Din’s son Qutb ud-Din Mubarak Shah (1316–1320) abolished the network of spies, abandoned the price controls, and raised military wages.
The Delhi sultanate was torn by unrest until Ala ud-Din’s Mongol or Turco-Mongol officer Ghiyas ud-Din Tughluq made himself sultan and founded the Tughluq dynasty (1320–1414).
He also recovered Bengal, which had been independent of Delhi since the death of Balaban.
It was widely believed that the accident was engineered by Tughluq’s son Muhammad, who now became sultan (1324–1351).
Muhammad’s reign started well.
He sent the leading Muslim residents of Delhi to live in Daulatabad and transformed the old capital into a base for a huge army with which he intended to drive the Mongols from Khurasan (northern Afghanistan).
To clear a route to Khurasan, Muhammad sent a large force through passes in the Himalayas, where his men were wiped out by mountaineers.
Meanwhile, the sultanate was reeling, as military costs and the expense of ruling the newly conquered south apparently worsened an economic slump that had hit all of Muslim Asia.
Because he was now the overlord of most of India, Muhammad could not plunder his neighbors to replenish his treasury.
Muslim nobles resented the sultan’s infringements on their prerogatives and his seeming preference for high-ranking Hindus.
At the same time, nobles born in India disliked the favoritism shown to Turks, Mongols, and other foreign Muslims.
Unfortunately, the Himalayan disaster and epidemics of disease had weakened the army, which could not be rebuilt because of the economic difficulties.
As a result, Muhammad was unable to suppress discontent.
In the 1330s, Muslim nobles in the Tamil country and in Bengal broke away to become independent sultans, and in 1336 the whole southern half of the Deccan seceded as the Hindu-ruled kingdom of Vijayanagara.
About 1335/ 1336, Muhammad apparently tried to regroup.
Muhammad campaigned in Gujarat and Sindh, where he died in 1351.
The new sultan, Muhammad’s cousin Firuz Shah (1351–1388), tried to win support through openhanded generosity to Muslim religious leaders, nobles, and army officers.
Infighting continued for ten years, until India was invaded by one of the great conquerors of the Middle Ages, the Turco-Mongol Temür, called Tamerlane in English.
He claimed that he was motivated by the desire to spread Islam, but scholars agree that in actuality he wanted either plunder or to reestablish the Mongol empire of Genghis Khan.
Temür crossed the Indus in September 1398 and advanced on Delhi.
For three days, Temür’s troops looted Delhi, massacring both Hindus and Muslims.
Then, the invaders circled through the districts east of the Yamuna before returning across the Indus.
In the wake of Temür’s incursion, the Delhi sultanate quickly broke up.
The governors of Gujarat, Malwa (western Madhya Pradesh), and other provinces raised themselves to the rank of sultans, and Hindu kings in Rajasthan and elsewhere regained their independence.
Delhi itself was dominated by a succession of nobles until one of them, the Afghan Khizr Khan, made himself sultan and founded the Sayyid dynasty (1414–1452).
Three years later, Bahlul Lodi, another Afghan noble, seized the capital.
He inaugurated the Lodi dynasty (1451–1526), which gradually restored Delhi’s supremacy over the Muslim and Hindu kings of North India.
The next sultan, Ibrahim (1517–1526), antagonized his nobles by trying to curb their power.
Daulat Khan Lodi, the governor of Punjab and a member of the sultan’s own tribe, rebelled and sought the assistance of Babur, the ruler of Kabul.
Babur, who was a direct descendant of both Temür and Genghis Khan, had already invaded India three times in an effort to reestablish his family’s supremacy there.
He welcomed Daulat Khan’s invitation, captured Lahore in 1524, and two years later advanced on Delhi.
The armies of Babur and Ibrahim met at Panipat north of Delhi on April 20, 1526.
The sultan had the larger army, but Babur’s combination of artillery and mounted archers won the day, and Ibrahim was killed in battle.
Babur and his successors became the most powerful dynasty in Indian history, the Mughal emperors.
MUSLIM RULE IN INDIA Although the sultans of Delhi were Muslims of foreign origin, the state that they ruled was similar in structure to the dominions of regional overlords in India before the conquests of Muizz ud-Din Muhammad Ghauri.
This happened during the decay of almost every dynasty at Delhi, under Muhammad Tughluq, and after Temür’s invasion.
At least in the eyes of Muslims, formal recognition by the khalifa was a great asset for a sultan who wanted to ensure the loyalty of his subordinates.
In 1258, however, Genghis Khan’s grandson captured and put to death the khalifa of the day, who lived at Baghdad in Iraq.
Then, in 1317/1318, Ala ud-Din Khalji’s son Qutb ud-Din Mubarak Shah proclaimed himself khalifa.
He may have hoped to enhance his authority by adding spiritual legitimacy to his temporal power, but he seems merely to have scandalized many Muslims.
The latter recognized the primacy of a line of khalifas who had lived in Egypt since the Mongol invasions.
In the fifteenth century, the office of khalifa seems to have declined in importance for Indian Muslims, although it regained its significance for a time in the twentieth century.
Association with a class of Muslim holy men called Sufis also enhanced the authority of sultans.
Orthodox Muslims regard the study of the Quran and obedience to Islam as the keys to salvation, but Sufis believe that with meditation, trances, and other techniques, it is possible for their souls to enter the presence of God himself.
Many Indian Muslims believed that God had conferred both religious and secular government on the Sufi shaikhs, or holy men, who were closer to Him than other mortals.
Many sultans of Delhi therefore sought the goodwill of shaikhs, and Muslim chroniclers often blamed disasters on sultans who treated Sufis badly.
The Delhi sultanate, and the Muslim states that seceded from it, had a Muslim religious elite comprising Sufi shaikhs, the ulama or interpreters of Islamic law, Islamic judges, and preachers.
In the time of Iltutmish, it included slave and free Turks, Arabs, Khalaj, Ghauris, and Iranians.
These were later supplemented with Mongols and Africans, and a growing number of Indian-born Muslims.
By the fourteenth century, the nobility also included Hindus, mostly local chieftains by background.
Except during and immediately after the reign of Ala ud-Din Khalji, nobles were usually paid with iqtas.
Iqtas and administrative offices were originally held for a stated term, sometimes as little as two or four years, but under Firuz Shah Tughluq, hereditary tenure became the norm.
At least from the accession of Raziyya in 1236, new monarchs sought to assure themselves of that support by exacting a pledge of allegiance from the nobles and leading men of Delhi, although Raziyya herself found the limits to loyalty when she was deposed by her nobles.
After taking power, both Balaban and Ala ud-Din replaced the existing nobility with trusted supporters, but most sultans promoted their own men alongside the older aristocracy rather than eliminate it.
Beginning with Mahmud the Ghaznawid, Muslim rulers used the plundered silver of Hindu kings and temples to mint coins that circulated throughout the Muslim trading world.
Meanwhile, the conquests of Muizz ud-Din Muhammad Ghauri gave the trade of North India access to the great Eurasian empires.
These were dominated by first the Turks and then the Mongols, and linked the expanding economies of Europe and China.
HINDUISM, BUDDHISM, AND ISLAM IN INDIA When Muizz ud-Din first invaded North India, most of the people of South Asia were Hindus, Buddhists, or followers of Tribal beliefs.
Hinduism, however, flourished and continued to absorb Tribal religions.
At the same time, large numbers of Indians became Muslims, and since then, Hinduism and Islam have been the two main religions of South Asia.
Along with many other folk beliefs, their practices gradually merged into Hinduism.
By the time of Muizz ud-Din Muhammad Ghauri, Indian Buddhism was largely confined to an ever-shrinking number of monasteries in North India.
Hinduism was vibrant enough not to be seriously affected  by the occasional demolition of temples by iconoclastic Muslim conquerors, but the destruction of Buddhist monasteries apparently brought about a rapid—and almost total—disappearance of Buddhism from North India.
Seven centuries later, in 1954, many Untouchable Hindus converted to Buddhism.
They believed that Buddha opposed the caste system, although in fact caste apparently did not even exist in any recognizable form in Buddha’s time.
Buddhists in India today total only 8 million, or less than 1 percent of the total population.
It has been seen that the Arab rulers of Sindh recognized Hindus as dhimmis.
This could be justified under Islamic law on the grounds that the jizya was ostensibly a payment in lieu of military service, and Hindus (unlike Jews or Christians) could and did serve in the army.
Perhaps more importantly, at least outside of cities, it was difficult to exact the jizya from a population composed largely of non-Muslims, many of whom were under the immediate administration of fellow Hindus.
It appears that sultans often determined their treatment of Hindus according to the political needs of the moment.
For example, Ala ud-Din Khalji was firmly in control for much his reign.
Muhammad Tughluq, however, was in constant fear of his Indian-born Muslim nobles.
He sought to counter them by securing the support of both Hindus and foreign-born Muslims.
His successor Firuz Shah looked on orthodox Muslims as a source of strength, and accordingly collected the jizya, destroyed Hindu temples that had been built since the time of Muizz ud-Din, and suppressed heretical Muslim sects.
Nevertheless, Hindus always predominated in the armies, the building crews, and the lower administration of the sultanates of India.
Despite the occasional insistence of orthodox theologians that no nonMuslim should be admitted to the ruling class, an increasing number of Hindus entered the ranks of the nobility in Delhi and the other sultanates.
At least in part, this was because there were never enough Muslims in India for any sultan to be able to dispense with Hindu assistance, for while much of North India was under Muslim rule for 600 years, and the Deccan for 400 years, the majority of the people of South Asia remained Hindu.
This is not to say that Hinduism was unaffected by Muslim rule.
Such Hindu regional overlords as the Gurjara-Pratiharas and the Senas had often been generous patrons of Hindu temples.
It has been suggested that in some areas, the end of independent Hindu kingship helped strengthen the ever-changing caste system, as individual castes assumed what had been the king’s duty of keeping society in order.
Devotional Hinduism, or bhakti, originated long before the Muslim conquest but became more popular than ever in the sultanates of medieval India.
With their use of vernacular languages rather than Sanskrit, and their acceptance of worshippers of all castes, bhakti movements appealed particularly to the common people.
For example, the Bengali Brahmin Chaitanya (1486–1533) founded a sect devoted to the worship of God in the form of Krishna.
With few exceptions (the most notable being Firuz Shah Tughluq), sultans made no sustained efforts at converting Hindus to Islam.
Nevertheless, 120,102,000 Indians are now Muslims, 12 percent of the total population.
Whatever official policy may have been, many Indians clearly adopted the religion of their Muslim rulers.
A clue as to how this came about lies in the fact that the majority of Muslims in South Asia fall into several concentrations.
Before becoming Muslims, most of the inhabitants of Bangladesh apparently practiced Tribal religions.
In what is now Pakistan, many people once regarded themselves as Hindus or Buddhists, but they did not follow the orthodox forms of those religions.
For example, Sindhi Hindus did not regard the cow as sacred.
It is therefore simplistic to say that most South Asian Muslims are descended from Hindus and Buddhists who adopted the Muslim religion.
Most Sindhis were apparently not yet Muslims in the eleventh century, 300 years after the Arab conquest.
Even more striking is the case of Bangladesh, the eastern half of the historic region of Bengal.
By the time it was conquered by the Mughal successors of the sultans of Delhi in 1574, West Bengal was more or less part of the Indian cultural world, its people largely Hindus and peasants.
Most of East Bengal or Bangladesh, however, was still covered in dense forests and inhabited by Tribals.
In the seventeenth century, the Mughals instituted a policy of clearing the forests of Bangladesh, and transforming Tribals into peasants.
A “pioneer,” often from the lower levels of the secular or religious nobility of Bengal, would settle on a tract of forest land, and either bring in peasants, or teach the neighboring Tribals how to cultivate rice.
The pioneers included Hindus, but a majority of them were Muslims.
Many were, or said they were, holy men, especially Sufis.
Second, the Tribals seem to have been prone to accepting the leadership of men who claimed personal knowledge of God and professed a faith based on immutable written Scriptures such as the Quran.
Muslim teachers tried to persuade their followers to worship only those superhuman beings found in the Quran.
After several generations, the effort succeeded, but only at the cost of a compromise: The former Tribals now prayed to divinities who bore Quranic names but had all the characteristics of their non-Islamic predecessors.
Rural Bengali Muslims henceforth prayed exclusively to God rather than to saints and angels.
OTHER SULTANATES AND KINGDOMS South Asia therefore became a land of two principal religions, Hinduism and Islam.
This was reflected in the politics of the Delhi sultanate and its neighbors.
The latter included Kashmir, which for centuries was ruled by Hindu kings.
Kashmir lay on a major trade route, and its people actively traded with the Islamic world.
In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, many Muslims settled in Kashmir, and in 1339 a Muslim immigrant, Shah Mir, seized the throne and made himself the first sultan of Kashmir.
This was followed by the spread of Islam in Kashmir, which now has a largely Muslim population.
It has already been seen that in the 1330s, sultans in Bengal established their independence from Tughluq Delhi.
Eighty years later, a Bengali Hindu named Raja Ganesh rose to power.
Raja Ganesh knew that as a non-Muslim, he would never be accepted as sultan by the Bengali Muslim nobility.
In 1415, however, he had his son Jadu converted to Islam, and installed the boy as sultan under the name of Jalal ud-Din Muhammad.
Bengal was subsequently ruled by a succession of Turkish, African, and Arab Muslim sultans, some of whom openly funded Hindu preachers and scholars.
Ala ud-Din Khalji and Ghiyas ud-Din Tughluq conquered the Deccan and the Tamil country, but South India broke away from the control of Delhi during the troubled reign of Muhammad Tughluq.
Rather, two entirely new states arose, the Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagara in the Tamil country and the southern Deccan, and the Muslim Bahmani sultanate in the northern Deccan.
The city and kingdom of Vijayanagara were established in 1336.
The early sovereigns of Vijayanagara were not of royal blood.
They accordingly sought to legitimize their rule by declaring themselves the protectors of Hindu and Jain shrines against Muslim desecration, instituting the rituals connected with traditional Hindu kingship, and generously patronizing temples.
Frequent wars with the Muslim rulers to the north suggest that the Vijayanagara kings really were defenders of Hinduism against the menace of Islam.
To obtain it, they fought Hindus as well as Muslims, and if it served their purposes, they allied themselves with Muslims against other Hindus.
From the mid-fifteenth century onward, the Vijayanagara armies included many Muslim soldiers, particularly artillerymen, who were allowed to build their own mosque in the capital of the kingdom.
Eleven years after the foundation of Vijayanagara, Ala ud-Din Bahman Shah, Muhammad Tughluq’s governor of the Deccan, broke away and founded the Bahmani sultanate.
The Bahmanis claimed to be the guardians of Islam in south India and depicted their frequent conflicts with Vijayanagara as attempts to spread the true faith.
In reality, they were no more motivated by religion than their southern neighbors were, and the wars between the Bahmanis and Vijayanagara in some ways merely continued the old rivalry between the overlords of the Deccan and the Tamil country.
Muslims formed a tiny minority among the subjects of the Bahmanis, who depended on the support of Hindu officers, bureaucrats (usually Brahmins), headmen, and local chieftains.
Indeed, some sultans sought to check the rivalry between immigrant and Indian-born Muslims by promoting Hindus to high office.
In 1498, a new era in maritime history began when the Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama sailed around Africa and established direct sea contact between Europe and India.
In 1509, a Portuguese force defeated the combined fleets of the sultans of Egypt and Gujarat, which secured Portuguese control of the Indian Ocean.
From 1510, the Portuguese headquarters in Asia were at Goa on the west coast of India.
Of these, the most powerful were Ahmadnagar in northwestern Maharashtra, Bijapur in southern Maharashtra and northern Karnataka, and Golkonda in north- ern Andhra Pradesh.
Often, two of them joined forces against a third, and one side or the other made and broke alliances with Vijayanagara and the Portuguese.
If anything, Hindus enjoyed greater prominence in the successor sultanates than under the original Bahmani sultans.
The Ahmadnagar dynasty was of Hindu ancestry, and—as in the Delhi sultanate—the bureaucracy and the local administration in all the sultanates were largely in the hands of Hindus.
In Ahmadnagar and Bijapur, the Hindu village headmen, local chieftains, and petty kings coalesced into a caste called the Marathas, who corresponded to the Rajputs of North India; in Golkonda, as in Vijayanagara, local power was monopolized by Teluguspeaking Hindu warriors belonging to a number of castes.
In 1564, the sultans of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golkonda formed a rare triple alliance.
Their goal was to curb Ramaraya, the regent of Vijayanagara, who in his machinations to uphold his power had recently fomented revolt in several sultanates.
In January 1565, the allies met Ramaraya’s army on the banks of the Krishna.
The battle ended in a crushing defeat for Vijayanagara.
Ramaraya was killed.
The victorious sultans looted Vijayanagara city, and the Vijayanagara dynasty never returned to its old capital.
Ramaraya’s successors styled themselves kings until 1650, but they had little real power in what was now a fragmented kingdom.
Since the mid-fifteenth century, the Vijayanagara monarchs had rewarded their generals with land grants that resembled the iqtas of the Delhi sultanate.
Bijapur and Golkonda expanded southward into the former Vijayanagara territories.
Their dynasties were eventually extinguished by the Mughals who had established themselves at Delhi in 1526.
4 The Rise and Fall of the Mughal Dynasty THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MUGHAL DYNASTY As a descendant of Temür and Genghis Khan, Babur was called a Mughal, or Mongol.
When Babur died four years later, his son Humayun inherited an empire that extended from Central Asia in the west to Bihar in the east.
The Afghan nobles who had plagued Ibrahim Lodi remained restive, however, and one of them, Shir Khan Sur, rebelled.
In 1539 he defeated Humayun and made himself sultan of Delhi under the name of Shir Shah.
Shir Shah made administrative and financial reforms, among them establishing the rupee as the basis of the Indian currency.
But his successors were weak, and in 1555 Humayun returned from exile in Iran and restored the Mughal empire.
The new emperor, his thirteen-year-old son Akbar, became the greatest of the Mughals.
Like many of his family, Akbar was a military genius.
Between the 1560s and the 1590s, he subdued the Tribal region of Gondwana in Central India and the Rajput kings of Rajasthan, conquered Gujarat and Bengal, and established Mughal rule over much of Himachal Pradesh, Kashmir, the tribes of the present  Afghan-Pakistani border, and Sindh.
In 1595, the Iranian governor of the city of Qandahar defected to Akbar, who thus acquired control of southern Afghanistan.
South of the Mughal dominions, in the Deccan, were the sultanates of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golkonda.
Akbar conquered much of Ahmadnagar, and by the time of his death in 1605, he ruled one of the great empires of the Muslim world.
Akbar began his reign as a devout Muslim.
He became a devotee of another Sufi, Shaikh Salim Chishti, who lived at Sikri near Agra.
When Shaikh Salim died in 1571, the emperor honored him by moving his capital from the Lodi city of Agra to Sikri, which he renamed Fathpur (Town of Victory) Sikri.
Akbar’s Fathpur Sikri centered on a huge mosque and the tomb of Shaikh Salim, which showed the world that he was a good Muslim king and thus entitled to the throne.
An interest in his religion led Akbar to organize debates on Islamic theology.
As he listened to their arguments, Akbar concluded that Islam did not have a monopoly on the truth.
For centuries, Muslim rulers in India had supported Islamic holy men with hereditary grants of land.
Akbar, however, confiscated all grants where title could not be proved.
This angered the ulama, the interpreters of Islamic law, who were further alienated by Akbar’s distribution of land to leaders of other religions and by his refusal to suppress unorthodox Muslims.
They were particularly incensed at Akbar’s removal of long-standing restrictions on non-Muslims, culminating in 1579 with the abolition of the jizya, the tax on non-Muslims.
The same year, 1579, Akbar more or less rendered the ulama superfluous when he assumed their function of deciding how Islamic law would be applied.
In 1585, Akbar left Fathpur Sikri to campaign in the northwest.
But Akbar probably also went to Agra because Fathpur Sikri symbolized the nowdeparted days when he had exemplified Muslim kingship.
In place of Islam, Akbar now sought to legitimize his rulership with what has been called a Mughal “dynastic ideology.” This held that the emperor, his ancestors, and his descendants were particularly close to God, who had both given them special knowledge of religious truth and chosen them to govern.
Akbar spent lavishly on architects, poets, dancers, and musicians, including the Hindu singer-musician Tansen who created classical North Indian music.
Ignoring the orthodox Muslim view that portraiture is a sinful attempt to imitate God’s creativity, Akbar sponsored Iranian and Indian painters.
Dynastic ideology merged with Akbar’s own beliefs when he initiated most of his nobles into his fire worship.
And every morning at dawn, Akbar appeared on the balcony of the palace, where (like a Hindu deity) he gave divine grace to all who glimpsed him.
Under Babur and Humayun, the majority of high-ranking Mughal nobles were Central Asian Muslims, like the emperors themselves.
Akbar defeated them and decided to dilute their strength with men from other backgrounds.
Most of these newly minted nobles were Iranian Muslims, but Akbar introduced another new element into the upper Mughal nobility.
Early in Akbar’s reign, Raja Bharamall Kachhawaha, a Rajput king from Rajasthan, had obtained the emperor’s help in resolving difficulties with a local Mughal official.
He showed his gratitude by giving Akbar his daughter in marriage, and in return was enrolled as a noble.
This opened a century and a half of warm relations between the Mughals and the Rajputs.
Most Mughal emperors took Rajput wives, and Rajputs reached the highest levels of the nobility.
This secured for the Mughals the loyalty of the Rajput kings and chiefs who dominated much of northern and western India, and let the imperial government draw on their military and administrative skills.
At the same time, Akbar reorganized the nobility with a system of ranks (mansabs) that had originated under the Mongols.
He assigned a rank to every noble, or mansabdar, reserving for himself the right to create, promote, or demote as he saw fit.
In return, each mansabdar was to  maintain a standing body of troops, trained and equipped to imperial standards.
The number of men varied according to the rank of the mansabdar.
So did salary, although Akbar reinforced the loyalty of his nobles by paying all of them generously.
Mansabdars filled the higher positions in both the army and the administration.
Efforts to block the emergence of rivals also underlay Akbar’s administrative reforms.
The system was replicated in the provinces into which Akbar divided his dominions, where a governor oversaw law and order, a diwan collected taxes, and so on.
The whole edifice was firmly under the control of Akbar, who daily received and acted upon reports from all over the empire.
All this was underpinned by the efficient system of taxation established by Akbar and his talented finance ministers, notably the Hindu Raja Todar Mall.
Most of the rest was used to pay the salaries of the mansabdars.
Like the iqta of the Delhi sultanate, a jagir was the right to the revenue from a specified parcel of land, although it did not carry with it the administrative rights to the tract that were normally conferred on recipients of iqtas.
Frequent confiscation and redistribution of jagirs gave Akbar yet another means of maintaining control over his mansabdars.
Building on a base laid by Shir Shah, Akbar and his financial advisers remodeled the system of revenue collection.
Todar Mall’s agents surveyed yields and prices across the empire.
JAHANGIR AND SHAH JAHAN The greatest blot on Akbar’s generally successful reign was probably his son Salim, named for the Sufi shaikh.
While the emperor was campaigning in Ahmadnagar, Salim unsuccessfully tried to seize the throne.
The next installment came in 1605, when Akbar lay dying.
This time, it was Salim’s seventeen-year-old son Khusrau who attempted a coup.
Akbar effected a deathbed reconciliation with Salim, who became the fourth Mughal emperor under the name of Jahangir.
Unlike his father, Jahangir remained a devotee of Sufi saints, and he was willing to suppress religious leaders who were likely to provoke unrest.
But his mother was the daughter of Raja Bharamall Kachhawaha, and he celebrated the major Hindu festivals and occasionally visited a Hindu holy man.
Jahangir, however, is best remembered for the artistic patronage that he exercised with his favorite wife, Nur Jahan.
Jahangir’s principal military concern originated in his father’s campaigns in Ahmadnagar.
What remained of that sultanate passed under the control of Malik Ambar, an African slave and sometime commander in the Ahmadnagar army, who fought the Mughals with guerrilla warfare.
In 1608, a Mughal army defeated Malik Ambar.
This scenario was regularly repeated until Malik Ambar died eighteen years later.
Jahangir, by now addicted to a mixture of opium and wine, never recovered from the shock.
He died in October 1627, touching off a struggle for succession that ended when his third son Shah Jahan became emperor in January 1628.
Shah Jahan moved the Mughal empire away from Akbar’s religious eclecticism.
He encouraged the support of his mansabdars through a sense of hereditary noble loyalty to the dynasty, rather than discipleship.
Hindus, particularly Rajputs, remained prominent in the nobility, and with his favorite wife Mumtaz Mahall, Shah Jahan presided over a flowering of arts and literature.
After Mumtaz Mahall died in childbirth in 1631, the grieving Shah Jahan commemorated her with the Taj Mahal at Agra, regarded by many as the most beautiful building in the world.
While the Taj was being built, Shah Jahan decided to leave Agra and return the capital to Delhi.
Between 1639 and 1648, Shah Jahan oversaw the construction of Shahjahanabad, now called Old Delhi, the Mughal seat till the dynasty ended in 1857.
Shah Jahan was as keen on conquest as he was on building.
He went to war against the remnants of Ahmadnagar, whose defenders came under the command of a Hindu noble named Shahji Bhonsle.
Shahji belonged to the Maratha caste, which for generations had served the sultans of Ahmadnagar and Bijapur as administrators and soldiers.
In 1636, however, Shahji surrendered, and all of Ahmadnagar was annexed to the Mughal empire.
For most of the next fifty years, a shaky peace subsisted between the Mughals and the remaining Deccan sultanates, Bijapur and Golkonda.
This allowed the sultans to expand southward into Carnatic, the eastern Deccan coast that once formed part of Vijayanagara.
At the same time, the Mughals tried to destabilize their southern neighbors by fomenting discontent among their subjects.
AURANGZEB The most capable of the four sons of Shah Jahan and Mumtaz Mahall were Dara Shikoh, the eldest and his father’s favorite, and Aurangzeb, the third son.
The lazy and arrogant Dara Shikoh had a gift for alienating others.
Like his great-grandfather Akbar, he enjoyed theological discussions with Hindus and Jesuits, and believed that all religions contained an identical truth.
Aurangzeb was hardworking and a devout Muslim.
When Shah Jahan fell seriously ill in September 1657, the four princes began to maneuver for the throne.
As they assembled their armies, Shah Jahan unexpectedly recovered, but preparations had reached the point of no return and the brothers went to war.
Aurangzeb defeated Dara Shikoh in May 1658, took Agra, and announced the deposition of Shah Jahan.
He went on to Delhi, where he was crowned emperor under the name of Alamgir.
When Dara Shikoh fell into his hands a few months later, Aurangzeb decided that he must die.
Another brother, Murad Bakhsh, was later executed on charges of murder; the remaining brother, Muhammad Shuja, fled to what is now Burma and met his death there.
Shah Jahan lived out his days in captivity in Agra fort.
Aurangzeb resolved to complete Shah Jahan’s transformation of Akbar’s empire into a Muslim state.
The ulama regained the power that they had lost in the 1580s, and Aurangzeb reiterated his father’s orders for the destruction of all newly built or repaired nonMuslim places of worship.
None of these measures was thoroughly enforced, but the mere fact that imperial policy now treated non-Muslims as second-class citizens provoked resentment.
But there was more to Aurangzeb than philistinism and religious bigotry.
He supported architects and intellectuals whose work was compatible with Islam—for example, the builders of the Pearl Mosque at Delhi and the Imperial Mosque at Lahore, or the philosopher Danishmand Khan who was equally familiar with Hindu thought and the works of René Descartes.
Political considerations probably outweighed  the emperor’s unquestionably sincere faith in such incidents as the execution of Dara Shikoh.
Aurangzeb’s troubled relations with the Sikh religion show the same mixture of religious and secular causes.
Sikhism was founded by Nanak (1469–1539), a Punjabi Hindu belonging to a merchant caste.
In a long quest for religious truth, Nanak probably talked with Hindus and Muslims, and traveled to holy places inside and outside India.
He was strongly influenced by the teachings of Kabir, a weaver who asserted that neither the Hindu Vedas nor the Muslim Quran was true.
Kabir dismissed image worship, fasts, and pilgrimages as irrelevant to salvation, and instead advised worshipers to build their love for God until they lost themselves in Him.
Nanak eventually developed his own theology and preached it to a growing circle of disciples or Sikhs.
It centers on a loving God with the power to intervene and save us from the rebirth that, Sikhs agree with Hindus, is our natural fate.
God reveals Himself to us when we envelope ourselves in His Word and His Name, which are embodied in the sacred verses composed by such teachers (gurus) as Kabir and Nanak.
When Nanak died, his chosen successor Angad became the second guru of the Sikhs (1539–1552).
He was followed by Amar Das (1552– 1574), Ram Das (1574–1581), and Arjan (1581–1606).
Their tenures saw the spread of Sikhism among Punjabis of all religions and classes.
One of its pillars was Amritsar, “the essence of the nectar of immortality,” a sacred pool built by Ram Das.
The Golden Temple, the spiritual center of Sikhism, was afterwards built in the pool, and the city of Amritsar grew up around it.
Another pillar was the Adi Granth (First Book) or Granth Sahib (Honored Book), the Sikh scriptures, compiled in 1604 from the writings of Kabir, the Sikh gurus, and other holy men.
Arjan had good relations with Akbar, who met him in 1598.
Some of these were schismatic Sikhs, who followed such gurus of their own as Arjan’s brother Prithi Chand.
In 1606, Arjan was arrested and executed by Jahangir.
This was supposedly because the guru had blessed the emperor’s rebellious son Khusrau, although it has been suggested that the emperor was actually influenced by slanders against Arjan, or that he disliked the Sikhs because of their active proselytization.
The gurus Hargobind (1606–1644), Har Ray (1644–1661), and Har Krishan (1661–1664) generally avoided confrontation with the secular authorities by living in the Hindu kingdoms of Himachal Pradesh, which paid tribute to the Mughals but enjoyed considerable autonomy.
After the death of Har Krishan, political and religious quarrels took relations between Sikhs and emperor to a new low.
Aurangzeb, who was now emperor, wanted to see Har Krishan’s brother, his friend Ram Ray, as the new guru, but the position instead went to Hargobind’s son Tegh Bahadur (1664–1675).
The bad feelings between Aurangzeb and Tegh Bahadur were worsened by the emperor’s religious policy, which among other things led to the demolition of at least one Sikh temple.
In the end, Tegh Bahadur decided to uphold his faith through martyrdom.
SHIVAJI After Shah Jahan’s conquest of Ahmadnagar in 1636, Shahji the Maratha entered the army of the sultan of Bijapur, whom he served in the campaigns in Carnatic.
He made over his lands in the Pune area of northern Bijapur to his young son Shivaji.
Shivaji afterwards took advantage of the long illness of the sultan, and the effects of destabilization by the Mughals, to acquire suzerainty over hilltop fortresses and rural Maratha chieftains on both sides of the border between Bijapur and the old Ahmadnagar sultanate.
Shivaji’s expansionism led to war with the Mughals in 1659.
Four years later, after the Marathas raided the principal imperial military camp in the Deccan and sacked the great port of Surat in Gujarat, Aurangzeb sent a huge army into Maharashtra.
The Marathas and Mughals were fighting different wars, for Shivaji relied on guerrilla tactics and Aurangzeb on sieges and battles, and this meant that neither side could win.
Eventually, Shivaji agreed to enter Aurangzeb’s service and surrender the majority of his forts in return for recognition of his title to his remaining posses-  sions.
Aurangzeb regarded his guest as an upstart chieftain, not the regional overlord he had become, and after a few months an angry Shivaji returned home.
He recaptured his lost forts, sacked Surat again, and raided Mughal territory, and in 1674 had himself crowned king in a Hindu ceremony.
This represented a formal declaration of independence from the Mughals and Bijapur, and also ensured the legitimacy of his authority in the eyes of his Brahmin officials and Maratha chieftains.
On Shivaji’s death in 1680, his son Sambhaji assumed the Maratha throne.
The previous year, several Rajput clans in Rajasthan had revolted against Aurangzeb.
As Hindus, the Rajputs were unhappy with the new Islamic policy (although Rajput mansabdars were exempted from the reimposed jizya), but they were more concerned over infringements of their privileges: a sharp fall in the proportion of Rajputs in the high nobility, a reduction in their lucrative jagir holdings, and the emperor’s interference in a succession dispute in the Rajput kingdom of Jodhpur.
Aurangzeb despatched his youngest son Muhammad Akbar to quell the uprising.
The prince, however, first joined the revolt, then fled to Sambhaji in Maharashtra.
To Aurangzeb, however, a greater danger lay in the possibility that Muhammad Akbar might forge an alliance of the Marathas, the Rajputs, and the Bijapur and Golkonda sultanates.
Then, Muhammad Akbar fled to Iran, and in 1689 Aurangzeb captured and executed Sambhaji.
During the reign of Jahangir, the Portuguese were driven from their hundred-year-old command of the Indian Ocean by two merchant firms, the English and the Dutch East India Companies, founded in 1600 and 1602 respectively.
In 1664, they were joined by a French East India Company.
THE DECLINE OF THE MUGHAL EMPIRE The execution of Sambhaji marked the beginning of the end of the Mughal empire.
Despite year after year of campaigning in the Deccan, Aurangzeb was unable to capture the new Maratha king, Sambhaji’s brother Rajaram, whose men carried on a guerrilla war.
After Rajaram’s death, the struggle was continued by his widow Tarabai.
Trade through Surat virtually dried up, and Bombay, an old Portuguese station that now belonged to the English East India Company, gradually replaced Surat as the principal port on the west coast.
Meanwhile, from 1685 the area around Agra was torn by a rebellion among the Jats, members of a large cultivating community of North India, who disrupted the main road linking Delhi to the Deccan.
In the following decade, the guru Gobind Das (1675–1708) showed the strength of the Sikhs when his men helped defeat Mughal troops who had been sent to collect tribute from refractory kings in Himachal Pradesh.
Before a great body of Sikhs who had gathered to celebrate the spring festival of Baisakhi, Gobind Das established his Khalsa or Pure Ones, a body of Sikh men who underwent an initiation of his own devising.
The guru and his initiates took the name of Singh (“lion”), Gobind Das becoming Gobind Singh.
Members of the Khalsa were required to bear arms and were forbidden to cut their hair, and were unquestionably loyal to the guruship of Gobind Singh, who insisted that they were the only authentic Sikhs.
Himachal Pradesh kings, fearful of the growing power of the guru in their midst, persuaded Aurangzeb to send an army against Gobind Singh.
This touched off a war between the Mughals and the Khalsa.
This hit at the salaries of the mansabdars, whose consequent demoralization was increased when Aurangzeb sought to secure the adherence of Muslim and Maratha nobles from the Deccan by promoting them over the heads of North Indians who belonged to families that had served the Mughals for generations.
Inevitably, the mansabdars’ loyalty to the emperor began to fray.
Aurangzeb died in the Deccan in 1707.
The usual war of succession among his three surviving sons was won by Bahadur Shah, who tried to restore order.
He released Sambhaji’s son Shahu, who had lived at the Mughal court since 1689 but now returned to Maharashtra to claim his father’s throne.
This split the Marathas between the supporters of Shahu and of his sister-in-law Tarabai.
Bahadur Shah also ended his father’s quarrel with Gobind Singh.
In 1708, Gobind Singh was murdered.
He had indicated that the Granth Sahib and the will of the Khalsa could jointly lead the Sikhs, rendering a living guru unnecessary.
Meanwhile, despite the truce between Gobind Singh and Bahadur Shah, Mughal officials in Punjab had continued to persecute the Sikhs.
Not long before his death, the guru told a Sikh named Banda Bahadur to lead the Khalsa against their oppressors.
Banda Bahadur launched a revolt that ended Mughal control over much of eastern Punjab and northern Haryana.
A desperate Bahadur Shah led his army to Punjab, where he died in 1712.
Yet another war of succession ended in the accession of Bahadur Shah’s son Jahandar Shah.
The new emperor was drunken and frivolous, and left the administration to Zu’l-Fiqar Khan, a mansabdar who had helped him defeat his brothers.
Zu’l-Fiqar Khan desperately tried to win support for his regime: He abolished the jizya; showered titles and lands on Rajput kings; even appointed Sambhaji II, Tarabai’s candidate for the Maratha kingship, as a mansabdar.
Within months, however, Jahandar Shah’s nephew Farrukhsiyar laid claim to the throne.
He obtained the support of the brothers Sayyid Husain Ali and Sayyid Abdallah Khan, members of an old noble Indian Muslim family.
With an army supplied by the Sayyids, Farrukhsiyar seized power and executed Jahandar Shah and Zu’l-Fiqar Khan.
In 1715, Banda Bahadur and 700 of his fellow Khalsa warriors were captured and executed, and in 1718 Sayyid Husain Ali ended the Mughals’ war with the Marathas by concluding a treaty with Shahu.
The agreement recognized Shahu as ruler of the Maratha conquests in the Deccan and granted him a share of the imperial revenues that had been claimed by the Maratha kings since Shivaji (amounting to 35 percent of the revenues in the Deccan, and 25 percent in Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat).
In return, Shahu agreed to supply the Sayyid brothers with tribute and soldiers.
Meanwhile, Farrukhsiyar lived in constant terror that the Sayyids would turn on him, and devoted himself to intriguing against them rather than to ruling his empire.
In 1719, the standoff ended when the combined armies of Husain Ali and Shahu overthrew Farrukhsiyar.
The Sayyids installed three grandsons of Bahadur Shah as puppet emperors in rapid succession, Rafi ud-Darjat, Rafi ud-Daula, and Muhammad Shah.
But Husain Ali and Abdallah Khan were unpopular among many mansabdars of Iranian and Central Asian background on account of their Indian origins and the pro-Hindu tendencies that the alliance with Shahu seemed to demonstrate.
The new emperor Muhammad Shah quickly transferred his support to Nizam ul-Mulk, and the two Sayyids were murdered.
MUHAMMAD SHAH Under Muhammad Shah, the Mughal empire disintegrated.
Like Farrukhsiyar, he spent more time plotting against his nobles than governing.
Left to their own devices, Mughal governors and mansabdars drifted into independence.
Murshid Quli Khan was a textbook case.
A Brahmin slave who had converted to Islam, he rose to the office of diwan (head of the revenue collection) for Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa.
In the time of Farrukhsiyar, he acquired the additional position of governor, violating  Mughal practice that had always kept the two functions separate.
Now, Murshid Quli Khan could apply the revenues of his provinces directly to his own administration, although he continued to send his surplus funds to Delhi where they formed a bulwark of the imperial finances.
Muhammad Shah’s lack of interest in his eastern provinces allowed Murshid Quli Khan to consolidate his position.
He reduced the power of local chieftains and filled the administration with his dependents (often his own relatives or Bengali Hindus).
He maintained stability, so that trade flourished, and conducted the first reassessment of the land revenue since Raja Todar Mall’s survey.
On his death, it seemed natural for the government of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa to pass to his son-in-law Shuja ud-Din Muhammad Khan (1727–1739).
Finally, Allahwardi Khan (1740–1756) began to retain all the revenues of Bengal and Bihar for himself, severing the last real bond between Delhi and eastern India.
It was much the same story in the province of Awadh in Uttar Pradesh, under the governorships of Saadat Khan (1722–1739) and his nephew Safdar Jang (1739–1754), of whom the latter extended his control over the neighboring province of Allahabad.
Nizam ul-Mulk, the Central Asian nobleman who had overthrown the Sayyid brothers, found that he could not dominate the government at Delhi.
He retired south to the old Golkonda capital of Hyderabad, from where he ruled much of the Deccan until his death in 1748.
At first, peninsular India was a patchwork of territories controlled by Nizam ulMulk and the Marathas.
The situation gradually solidified, so that Nizam ul-Mulk dominated the eastern Deccan, and the Marathas the western.
Nearer to Delhi, the Rajput kings asserted their autonomy in Rajasthan, and seized Mughal districts that bordered on their lands.
The Ruhela and Bangash clans of Afghans took control of the region between Delhi and Awadh, and the Jats established themselves as masters of much of Agra province.
Punjab headed toward independence under the governor Abd us-Samad Khan and his family.
They were challenged by a hard core of the Khalsa that went into outlawry after the execution of Banda Bahadur, plundering and killing anyone associated with the Mughal government.
By 1748, the Khalsa ruled much of East Punjab, including Amritsar.
By the time that Farrukhsiyar came to the throne, Maharashtra was torn by civil war between the rival members of Shivaji’s family, Shahu and Tarabai.
Bands of Maratha peasants and soldiers turned to banditry and indiscriminately raided the lands of the two claimants and the Mughals.
Order was gradually restored by Balaji Vishvanath Bhat, a member of the Chitpavan subcaste of Brahmins.
Beginning as a clerk, Balaji rose to become Shahu’s peshwa or prime minister in 1713.
He won over many of Tarabai’s supporters, defeated several Mughal armies, and in 1718 negotiated the treaty with Sayyid Husain Ali that recognized Maratha rule in the Deccan.
Shahu named Balaji’s son Bajirav to be the new peshwa.
Bajirav made the peshwa the real head of the Maratha kingdom, which for the next century was ruled by his family; Shahu and his successors were reduced to symbolic kings.
During the 1720s, Bajirav incorporated the independent bands of parttime Maratha warriors into a professional army, commanded by men of unimpeachable loyalty.
He turned this force on the Mughal provinces to the north, and by his death in 1740, the Marathas had replaced the Mughals as the rulers of much of Madhya Pradesh and almost all of Gujarat.
In 1731, Bajirav ended the Maratha civil war by recognizing Tarabai’s candidate Sambhaji II as ruler of the Kolhapur area in southern Maharashtra.
Bajirav agreed to divide the new provinces, keeping some districts for himself and allocating others to his commanders in return for their continued allegiance to his government.
Under Bajirav’s son Nana Saheb or Balvantrav (1740–1761), the Marathas ranged even further afield.
In the 1740s they began incursions into Rajasthan, often at the invitation of Rajput princes who gave them lands and tribute in return for help in seizing the throne.
To the east, a Maratha warrior named Raghuji Bhonsle first acquired mastery over the Gond (Tribal) kingdom of Nagpur, and then began to raid the territories of Allahwardi Khan of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa.
In 1751, he compelled Allahwardi Khan to transfer Orissa to Maratha rule.
Meanwhile, in 1736, the emperor of Iran was overthrown by an officer named Nadir Shah.
When some of his soldiers were killed after entering the capital in search of loot, Nadir Shah ordered a general massacre.
The Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah was compelled to pay an indemnity of 20 million rupees and to cede all his territories west of the Indus.
Carrying a fortune in gold, silver, and jewels, Nadir Shah returned to Iran in May 1739, after vividly demonstrating the utter impotence of the Mughal empire.
Muhammad Shah died nine years later, in 1748.
5 A Century of Realignment MUGHALS AND MARATHAS Under Muhammad Shah’s son Ahmad Shah (1748–1754), the Mughal empire no longer existed.
Nevertheless, the governors who had made themselves independent in Bengal, Awadh, and elsewhere continued to recognize the nominal supremacy of the emperor.
Even the Marathas and Sikhs looked to the phantom emperor for recognition of their titles and conquests.
The Mughals also enjoyed spiritual authority over many Indian Muslims, particularly after Muhammad Shah resumed the function (renounced by Aurangzeb) of interpreting Islamic law.
Ahmad Shah was dominated by nawab Safdar Jang of Awadh, until Imad ul-Mulk (a grandson of Nizam ul-Mulk) and a Maratha army replaced him with Alamgir II (1754–1759).
After Imad ul-Mulk murdered Alamgir II, the latter’s son Shah Alam II (1759–1806) lived in Awadh under the protection of Safdar Jang’s successor Shuja ud-Daula.
These powerless emperors sought to boost their self-respect by taking the names of their more illustrious ancestors: Alamgir I had been Aurangzeb, and Shah Alam I was Bahadur Shah.
By the mid-eighteenth century, the near anarchy that parts of India had seen since the time of Aurangzeb was over.
In the 1750s, the most powerful ruler in India was the Maratha peshwa Nana Saheb.
His empire extended across the western Deccan, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, and Punjab.
He might have become master of all India, but this was prevented by a series of events that began with the assassination of Nadir Shah of Iran in 1747.
What is now Afghanistan was seized by an officer named Ahmad Shah Durrani, who raided India several times and in 1756–1757 imitated Nadir Shah by sacking Delhi.
In 1759–1760 Durrani drove the Marathas from Punjab, and then moved into Haryana.
Skirmishing between the Afghan and Maratha armies culminated in 1761 in a battle at Panipat, the place near Delhi where Babur had defeated sultan Ibrahim Lodi.
Durrani won a crushing victory, and he and his men took whatever they could carry back to Afghanistan.
The 50,000 dead at Panipat included several Maratha leaders, and Nana Saheb died soon after the battle.
The Marathas were further weakened by struggles between the new peshwa, Nana Saheb’s son Madhavrav I, and his uncle Raghunathrav.
Maratha warlords used the situation to make independent states of the provinces that they had shared with the peshwa since the 1730s.
The next year, his heir Narayanrav was killed by partisans of Raghunathrav, who challenged Narayanrav’s son Madhavrav II.
This touched off a civil war, which pitted Madhavrav’s guardian Nana Phadnis against Raghunathrav.
Nana Phadnis secured the support of the warlords.
Raghunathrav obtained troops from the British East India Company in return for territory and money (British rather than English, because since 1707 England had been joined with Scotland in the kingdom of Great Britain).
In 1779, however, Nana Phadnis and the warlord Mahadji Scindia defeated Raghunathrav.
Phadnis and Scindia then vied for control of the Marathas until Scindia’s death in 1794.
In the wake of the Maratha defeat at Panipat, Sikh warriors overran Punjab and northern Haryana.
By the 1770s the region was divided into over sixty principalities, most of them ruled by Khalsa Sikhs.
These chieftains employed non-Khalsa and even non-Sikh administrators and soldiers, and gave their patronage to religious persons and institutions of all religions.
Nevertheless, the late eighteenth century saw the steady absorption of schismatic Sikhs into the Khalsa.
Meanwhile, in the 1750s, a Muslim army officer named Haidar Ali had risen to power in the Hindu kingdom of Mysore in south India.
After Panipat, he extended his sway over all Karnataka.
In 1782 he was succeeded by his son Tipu Sultan, who conquered Kerala.
Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan were among the greatest Indian rulers of the eighteenth century.
In 1790–1792, however, the British, now allied with the nizam (ruler) of Hyderabad and the Marathas, defeated Tipu Sultan.
The victorious allies annexed half of Mysore’s territory.
THE BRITISH EAST INDIA COMPANY In the eighteenth century, the ships of the British East India Company and the British Royal Navy dominated the Indian Ocean, and the governors of the Company’s three main factories at Madras, Calcutta, and Bombay presided over a flourishing trade.
The French and British Companies were bitter rivals in the dominions of Nizam ul-Mulk, the ruler of Hyderabad.
For several years, two families had been dueling for the post of nawab of Carnatic, the Hyderabad governor on the southeast coast.
Then, the death of Nizam ul-Mulk in 1748 touched off a succession dispute in Hyderabad itself.
Joseph Dupleix, governor of the French factory at Pondicherry, used Indian mercenaries, trained in European tactics, to install on the thrones of Carnatic and Hyderabad rulers who were friendly to French interests.
Robert Clive of the British Company now imitated Dupleix, using Indian  troops to support pro-British claimants in Carnatic and Hyderabad.
Both Dupleix and Clive adopted the Indian practice of subsidiary alliance with their new friends: The pro-French or pro-British rulers agreed to pay tribute (called a “subsidy”) in return for military protection.
Meanwhile, trade with the British, French, and Dutch Companies helped make Bengal and Bihar wealthy.
This invited attacks by the Marathas, the Afghans, and the nawab of Awadh.
To meet the danger, nawab Allahwardi Khan of Bengal and Bihar pressed nobles, bankers, zamindars, and the Companies for money.
(Zamindars, literally possessors of the land, collected the land revenue from cultivators or local chieftains, and passed it on to the government.
They usually also administered justice and maintained order, and were the descendants of Hindu petty rulers or Muslim officials appointed by the Mughals and nawabs.) In 1756, Allahwardi Khan was succeeded by his great-nephew Siraj ud-Daula.
The new nawab dismissed most of his predecessor’s civilian and military officials, including a general named Mir Jafar.
Then, Siraj ud-Daula’s demands for money alienated the powerful banking firm of Jagat Seth (Banker of the World), the zamindars, and the European Companies.
When the British rejected his demands, Siraj ud-Daula seized their factory at Calcutta.
At Madras, Clive had assembled British and Indian soldiers to use against the French in the Seven Years’ War.
He took them to Bengal instead and recaptured Calcutta.
There, he learned that the firm of Jagat Seth was plotting to replace Siraj ud-Daula with Mir Jafar.
Clive joined the conspiracy and agreed to supply troops.
On June 23, 1757, the armies of the Company and Siraj ud-Daula met at Plassey.
The nawab was captured and killed, and Mir Jafar was installed on the throne.
His impotence was made obvious when Company soldiers—not his own—defeated invasions of Bengal by the emperor Shah Alam and the Marathas.
A resentful Mir Jafar began to plot, until in 1760 the British deposed him in favor of his son-in-law Mir Qasim.
Mir Qasim wanted to leave coastal Bengal to the British and exclude them from the rest of his territories, but this was impossible.
After 1757, British traders spread through Bengal and Bihar and applied Mir Jafar’s concession of freedom from customs to their own as well as Company business.
The Company won, deposed Mir Qasim, and restored Mir Jafar.
Mir Qasim fled, and in 1764 he joined with Shuja ud-Daula of Awadh and the emperor Shah Alam to invade Bihar.
Mir Jafar died soon afterwards, and the British chose his successor.
In 1765, Robert Clive became the Company’s governor at Calcutta.
To ensure sufficient revenues, he secured from Shah Alam the Company’s appointment to the old Mughal post of diwan of Bengal and Bihar.
In return, Clive undertook to pay tribute to Shah Alam, although remittances ceased after the emperor came under Maratha domination on his return to Delhi seven years later.
As in Mughal times, the offices of governor and diwan of Bengal and Bihar were separate, after having been united in the person of the nawab since the beginning of the eighteenth century.
By 1790, when the position of deputy nawab was abolished, Bengal and Bihar were fully under British rule; and Calcutta had replaced the nawab’s seat as the capital.
After 1765, Clive began to restrain extortion by his subordinates, but their mismanagement and corruption helped ensure a constant shortfall in revenues.
The first governor-general was a Company employee, Warren Hastings, but (in an effort to ensure impartiality) his successors were usually British aristocrats with no experience of India.
Britons almost universally agreed that the primary purpose of the Company was to make money and that Bengal and Bihar could be used to this end.
The Company therefore built up its Bengal army.
After Plassey, the French and Dutch Companies stopped trading in Bengal, but the British had no objection to individual private foreign traders in their new dominions and American, Danish, Portuguese, and French merchants testified to the vitality of Indian commerce.
Unlike previous diwans, the Company did not spend its revenues solely on the administration of Bengal and Bihar.
It began to use local taxes—rather than the imported silver used before 1765—to buy exports in Bengal, and applied profits from the sale of Indian goods in London towards its expenses in Britain.
Much of the opium was also exported, to Britain and especially China and Southeast Asia, and in the 1820s opium sales provided 10 percent of the revenues of the Bengal government.
For reasons that are unclear, there was a crisis in the rural economy of Bengal and Bihar.
Some have pointed to a famine that killed between one fifth and one third of the population of Bengal in 1769–1770; others to a breakdown in law and order after the establishment of British rule; still others to a general economic decline that affected the Middle East and South Asia in the mid-eighteenth century.
Lord Cornwallis, governor-general from 1786 to 1793, sought to solve the revenue crisis.
Indeed, Cornwallis exemplified a new racist climate of opinion that soon virtually ended the once-close business and social ties between Company employees and Indians, as well as sexual relationships between British men and Indian women.
To replace the supposedly corrupt Indians and Britons, Cornwallis recruited educated men from good families in Britain, selected by patronage and later by competitive examination.
They formed a corps of elite administrators, eventually known as the Indian Civil Service, and oversaw a huge body of Indian and British subordinates.
In 1793, Cornwallis appointed a British “collector” in each of the districts into which Bengal and Bihar were divided.
The same year, the governor-general implemented the Permanent Settlement, so called because it set the land revenue assessment forever.
Henceforth, each zamindar in Bengal and Bihar was to remit the annual land revenue at the level collected in 1789–1790.
For many years, supporters had argued that a Permanent Settlement would encourage zamindars to promote agricultural improvement among their cultivators: By setting the land revenue in perpetuity, it would make the zamindars want to maximize productivity, because they  (rather than the government) would pocket its fruits.
The first result of the Permanent Settlement, however, was the breakup and sale of virtually all the large estates in Bengal and Bihar, as the great zamindars defaulted on their payments.
Zamindars who had survived thus far could now enhance rents without needing to encourage improvement, and the peasants of Bengal and Bihar were increasingly exploited.
This, however, was due not so much to the Permanent Settlement as to population, which had always governed the relationship between cultivators and the recipients of their dues.
In the nineteenth century, the population of Bengal and Bihar grew fast, thanks to the absence of great famines or floods, and this let zamindars increase rents without any fear of losing tenants.
LORD WELLESLEY In 1798, Lord Wellesley, the brother of the Duke of Wellington, was appointed governor-general.
Wellesley desired glory and was also convinced that Indians were better off under British rule than under that of their compatriots.
The war between Britain and Revolutionary France, which had begun in 1793, aroused his fears of French officers who served in the Maratha and Hyderabad armies, and of Tipu Sultan of Mysore who had sought an alliance with France.
Moreover, Wellesley realized that Indian resources could serve British interests worldwide.
Wellesley first went to war with Tipu Sultan, who was defeated and killed in 1799.
The remainder was divided between the Company and Hyderabad.
Then came the subsidiary allies, by now Carnatic, Hyderabad, and Awadh.
Subsidiary alliances invariably undermined Indian rulers.
Wellesley annexed Carnatic, then forced the rulers of Hyderabad and Awadh to accept tighter British control and to cede much of their territory.
This touched off a Maratha civil war, in which the new peshwa, Bajirav II, and the warlords constantly switched sides.
Wellesley used the conflict to bring the Marathas under British control.
The same year, Bajirav II signed a treaty that placed all the Maratha territories under British supremacy, in return for military support.
The warlords Holkar, Scindia, and Bhonsle refused to recognize the agreement and went to war with the Company.
In 1803, the British defeated Scindia and Bhonsle, who entered subsidiary alliances and ceded territory.
The Company’s acquisitions included Delhi from Scindia and Orissa from Bhonsle.
When Wellesley refused to make peace, the directors dismissed him in 1805.
Pindaris, former cavalrymen in the Maratha armies, lived by raiding Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.
The governor-general Lord Hastings (1813–1823) (not related to Warren Hastings) sought to solve these problems by resuming expansion.
Hastings also suppressed  the Pindaris, and brought the kingdoms of Rajasthan under British supremacy.
In order to strengthen British control, Hastings ordered the peshwa to renounce what remained of his overlordship over the Marathas.
This so angered the peshwa and Bhonsle that they rebelled.
Bhonsle’s state of Nagpur was given to a new ruler under British domination, and the peshwa’s territories were annexed by the Company.
Hastings’ successor, Lord Amherst (1823–1828), rounded out British rule with a victory over Burma, which ceded to the Company the modern states of Assam, Meghalaya, and Manipur, and territory on the east coast of the Bay of Bengal.
Many Indian rulers recognized the nominal suzerainty of Shah Alam, his son Akbar II (1806–1837), and his grandson Bahadur Shah II (1837–1857), although in 1827 the Company gave up the pretense of subordination to the Mughal throne.
The territories that were annexed by the Company formed what was called British India.
The original provinces—Bengal, Madras, and Bombay—came into being as the Company placed newly acquired areas under the administration of the governors of its principal factories.
Provinces were divided into districts, on the model of Bengal and Bihar.
Governors, councillors, district collectors, and other senior officials often belonged to Cornwallis’s creation, the Indian Civil Service or ICS.
Much of the subcontinent, however, was not annexed to British India, and formed what was known as Indian India or the Indian states.
Local kings who had been subordinate to the Marathas or Nepal were later put in the same category.
The monarchs of Indian India, styled princes or chiefs by the British, headed their state governments but were required to follow the orders of a British representative (often called a resident).
By the early nineteenth century, the Industrial Revolution meant that British factories could turn out endless quantities of cheap cotton cloth.
Ever since its establishment, the Company had enjoyed a monopoly on trade from South and East Asia to Britain.
The army was particularly costly, absorbing 42.5 percent of the Indian government’s expenditure under Lord Wellesley, and about a third from the 1820s onward.
Indians fought in British campaigns in Asia, Africa, and Europe until World War II.
The Permanent Settlement was never implemented outside of Bengal and Bihar, which meant that revenue assessments could be raised.
In some areas, local chieftains were made landowners along the lines of the Bengali zamindars.
This was not possible everywhere—for example, in Mysore, where Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan had eliminated most of the chieftains.
This became impossible with the abolition of all armies in British India except the Company’s force of professional soldiers.
Similarly, with the end of the rule of the nawabs, the Muslim administrative elite that had dominated urban life in Bengal and Carnatic disappeared.
It was replaced by a new class of Hindus who owed their position to participation in the Company’s commercial and bureaucratic activities.
A long-standing trend that continued through the nineteenth century was the incorporation of Tribals and nomads into settled society.
This opened lands to settled farming, either by peasants from elsewhere or by Tribals themselves.
Despite what is sometimes said, however, Indian wealth played only a minor role in the Industrial Revolution.
Moreover, until 1813, during the crucial years of Britain’s economic transformation, the Company controlled the India trade, and it used its profits to pay its home expenses, not to feed British industry.
THE SIKH EMPIRE While Wellesley and Hastings were creating the Company state, a Sikh chieftain named Ranjit Singh was carving out an empire in the northwest.
Ranjit Singh fought Afghan invasions of Punjab in the 1790s, and in 1799 took Lahore and made it his capital.
Between then and 1836, he conquered the modern Northwest Frontier Province, Pakistani Punjab, Kashmir, and parts of Indian Punjab and Himachal Pradesh.
Partly because of Sikh military strength, mutual respect subsisted between Ranjit Singh and the British.
Ranjit Singh’s 12 million subjects included 1.5 million Sikhs.
Although there were Hindus and Muslims in the ruling class, Sikhs were dominant, and the army was probably over half Sikh.
Ranjit Singh was a member of the Khalsa, but he did not discriminate against Sikhs who followed their own gurus.
Ranjit Singh rewarded agricultural productivity, gave loans to support the digging of wells, and generally encouraged cultivation.
He also supported industry, including the weaving of Kashmiri shawls.
The Sikh empire was peaceful and prosperous, and—like the great Mughal emperors—Ranjit Singh sponsored architecture, painting, and Persian and Punjabi literature.
Conquest was expensive, however, and necessitated heavy taxes from British India and tribute from Indian states.
For various reasons, including the destruction of the textile industry, the economic situation became even worse in the 1830s and 1840s.
In 1841, however, the Afghans revolted, killed Shah Shuja, wiped out the Company force, and regained their independence.
Meanwhile, Ranjit Singh had died in 1839.
Soon afterwards, a power struggle broke out between two of his Hindu nobles, the brothers Raja Dhyan Singh and Raja Gulab Singh.
In 1841, Raja Dhyan Singh triumphed when he helped Ranjit Singh’s son Sher Singh seize the throne.
The same year, Sher Singh and Raja Dhyan Singh were murdered.
Ranjit Singh’s youngest son Dalip Singh was installed on the Sikh throne at the age of five.
Raja Gulab Singh, who had helped the conquerors, was made maharaja or king of Jammu and Kashmir.
The remainder of the Sikh empire was divided between the British and Dalip Singh, who held his portion as an Indian state.
The best known reforms were enacted by the governor-general Lord William Bentinck (1828–1835).
Thus, Hindus were traditionally governed by custom, which varied according to region and caste.
When the Company assumed control of justice in British India, however, its jurists consulted classical legal texts and Brahmin scholars, and applied their findings to all Hindus in the belief that this was authentic Hindu law.
This created a new legal system, followed across British India and blending Indian and British justice.
They established the Asiatic Society to study Indian literature and antiquities, and the Company government later founded Muslim and Sanskrit colleges at Calcutta.
From the 1790s, however, missionaries defied the ban or settled just outside British India, and in 1813 Parliament forced the Company to admit them.
LORD DALHOUSIE (1848–1856) Lord Dalhousie, who became governor-general in 1848, devoted himself to remedying the problems of the Company state.
To obtain revenues and security, he enlarged British India at the expense of the Indian states.
And in 1856, Dalhousie annexed Awadh, claiming misgovernment by its ruler.
When Dalhousie left India the same year, the Company state embraced virtually all of modern India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh.
Awadh alone added 5 million British pounds to the revenues, and further money was saved by ending the pensions paid to royal families that  had been dispossessed by Wellesley and Hastings.
For example, when the last peshwa, Bajirav II, died in 1853, Dalhousie refused to continue his allowance to his adopted son Nana Saheb.
Except in Bengal and Bihar, the land revenue was recalculated after 1845.
The annexation of Awadh in 1856 was followed by a revenue settlement that bypassed the rural landowners or taalluqedars, and collected directly from the peasants.
Occasionally, the East India Company’s Indian troops mutinied; in 1806, soldiers at Vellore in Tamil Nadu rebelled, apparently because they felt that the British were infringing on the practice of their religion.
It began with a mutiny in the Bengal Army (the Company’s forces were divided into three armies based in the original British centers).
The soldiers’ grievances were economic— for example, a recent decision to deny them foreign service allowances when they were stationed in distant parts of the subcontinent; they were religious, particularly postings to Burma and other places outside of India, which challenged high-caste Hindu soldiers to whom leaving India was religiously polluting; and they were political, especially for the third of the troops who came from Awadh and felt their honor and wealth threatened when that kingdom was annexed to British India in 1856.
If true, this made it a sin for Hindus and Muslims to use the rifles, because the former regard the cow as sacred, and the latter consider the pig unclean.
The fact that some British officers preached Christianity to their men had awakened fears among the soldiers that their religions were under attack, and the rumors about the grease only seemed to confirm them.
Bahadur Shah II, the eighty-oneyear-old heir to the title of Mughal emperor, accepted their request to become their nominal leader.
Most risings were led by landholders, chieftains, and members of royal families who had lost their kingdoms to the East India Company.
These included Lakshmibai, the widowed queen of Jhansi, which had fallen to Dalhousie’s Doctrine of Lapse; her bravery in battle against the British has made her a national heroine of India.
The same was true of the Bengal zamindars.
In the eight years since the annexation of the old Sikh Empire, the people of Punjab had been reconciled to foreign rule by recruitment into the well-paid Company army, low land revenue assessments, and other conciliatory policies.
Among other reasons, few of them came from the high castes that were particularly sensitive to religious concerns, and none was Awadhi.
Now, to punish him for accepting leadership of the revolt, the British exiled Bahadur Shah II to Burma and abolished the very title of Mughal sovereign.
And rightly or wrongly, many Britons blamed the uprising on the policies of the East India Company.
As in Company days, the capital of British India was Calcutta.
Up to the 1930s, more than one fourth of all the taxes collected in India flowed into Britain in the form of “Home Charges,” which paid for military supplies, pensions for British retirees from Indian services,  the expenses of the India Office, and interest on money that India had borrowed in London.
Nevertheless, the British did not want India simply for economic reasons.
Psychological considerations were probably as important to the British as economic ones.
In 1886, the eastern border of British India was extended with the annexation of what remained of Burma, which was administered as part of India till 1937.
The Indian Army stopped recruiting soldiers from communities that had mutinied, and turned instead to Punjabi Muslims, Sikhs, and other groups that had sided with the British.
The princes and chiefs of “Indian India” accordingly received land, titles, and a guarantee that their states would never be annexed to British India.
The elites of British India were also courted.
Rural chieftains and notables were recognized as landowners, on the model of the zamindars of Bengal, and received judicial powers over the inhabitants of their estates.
In Awadh, peasants were put back under the control of the taalluqedars, whose authority had been curtailed on the British annexation.
THE ECONOMY AND SOCIETY, 1858–1914 Between the revolt and the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the economy and society of India were affected by both British rule and changes that had begun centuries earlier.
The period saw gradual economic growth, helped by a low rate of population increase.
Agriculture remained at the heart of the Indian economy, employing over 70 percent of the population.
British-made yarn had dominated in China and Japan since the 1840s, but it was now driven out by Indian competition.
In 1907 an Indian merchant family, the Tatas, opened an iron and steel plant at Jamshedpur in Jharkhand.
This ironed out many of the regional and caste variations that had existed within Hinduism, Islam, and Sikhism.
For example, in the early nineteenth century, Sahajananda Swami founded the Swami Narayana Sampradaya, or Community of Lord Vishnu.
He and his missionaries traveled around Gujarat, calling on Hindus to stop eating meat and drinking alcohol, to abandon the obscene songs that featured in their religious gatherings, and to become devotees of Vishnu (in his incarnation of Krishna) rather than the female power that they then worshipped.
In what is now Bangladesh, Sahajananda’s contemporary Hajji Shariat Ullah led the Faraizi movement, which persuaded Bengali Muslim peasants and artisans to erase the Hindu and Tribal beliefs that had survived the adoption of Islam.
One faction founded the Hindu Dharma Sabha, the Association of the Hindu Religion, to defend such existing practices as sati.
Opposed to the Hindu Dharma Sabha were the followers of Henry Louis Vivian Derozio, a Calcutta college teacher of mixed Indian and European ancestry.
A rationalist, Derozio felt that his beloved Indian homeland had been held back by religion, and his student disciples epitomized their rejection of Hindu mores by eating beef.
Rammohun Roy lay between the Hindu Dharma Sabha and Derozio.
Although a devout Hindu, Roy was convinced that Brahmin priests had corrupted the true religion that he found in the Upanishads.
Roy’s Hinduism had one loving God, Brahma (the name of the Hindu creator), and no place for polytheism, image worship, or the subordination of women.
Roy believed that if his coreligionists returned to this faith, no Hindu would be tempted to convert to the Christianity of the missionaries.
He acquired a growing band of followers, and in 1828 organized them into the Brahmo Sabha (Association of Brahma).
Two years later, he went to England to give evidence against attempts by orthodox Hindus to overturn the criminalization of sati, speak in Parliamentary hearings on the East India Company, and represent the Mughal emperor in negotiations with the Company.
He died in England in 1833, and the Brahmo Sabha soon faded.
The Hindu Dharma Sabha, Derozio, and Roy had little influence except among educated Hindus of Calcutta.
Perhaps out of necessity, Muslim reform movements had a wider impact, as they sought both to explain how Islam had ceased to be the religion of the subcontinent’s masters and to remedy the consequent fall in status of Indian Muslims.
Shah Wali Ullah, who lived in Delhi during the decline of the Mughal empire in the eighteenth century, blamed the political and moral decay of Muslim India on the ulama, arguing that they had let incorrect beliefs and practices creep into Islam.
He insisted that nothing outside of the Quran and the Hadith (a collection of stories about Muhammad) was Islamic, and that the principles contained in those works should be ascertained by the use of reasoning rather than the current interpretations put forth by the ulama.
In the nineteenth century, Shah Wali Ullah’s spiritual heirs split.
One group tried to reestablish Muslim rule by force of arms, warring against both the Sikh Empire and the British.
In 1867, some of them founded the Deoband School to train theologians.
Sir Syed Ahmed Khan agreed that the ulama had misinterpreted Islam.
Rather than wanting a reformed ulama, however, he believed that the future of Indian Muslims lay in regaining political power.
To secure British agreement to this, he tried to build friendly relations between Muslims and their rulers.
To qualify young Muslims for their new position, he encouraged them to acquire Western learning, especially science and technology.
When the ulama asserted that this was un-Islamic, Sir Syed retorted that God Himself had created the natural laws underpinning science.
In 1875, he founded the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh (now Aligarh Muslim University) to teach Western learning in an Islamic environment.
The Deoband School, Sir Syed, and Muslims who accepted the thencurrent practices of Indian Islam agreed that Muhammad was God’s last prophet, and that his teachings (however interpreted) embodied truth.
At the end of the nineteenth century, however, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, a Punjabi lawyer, said that he had received divine messages to supplement the revelations given to Muhammad.
He and his missionaries made many converts to what became known as the Ahmadi movement, both in Punjab and in the West.
Ahmadis and other Muslims denounced one another as purveyors of falsehood.
Ahmadis insisted that it was incumbent on all Muslims to accept Ghulam’s completion of Muhammad’s work, and other Muslims held that as Muhammad was the last prophet, Ghulam must be a fraud.
By this time, many Indian Muslims considered themselves part of a worldwide Islamic community.
Early Muslims had regarded the khalifa or successor of Muhammad as their spiritual leader, but the importance of the khalifa in India had long since declined.
In the sixteenth century, the sultan of Turkey had assumed the title of khalifa, and now many Indian Muslims emphasized his primacy as a link among all Muslims.
This furthered their distance from Hindus.
Coupled with this was an  apparent threat from Hinduism, symptomized by a movement that began in the 1880s to replace Urdu (associated with Muslims) with Hindi (associated with Hindus) as the language of the local administration and courts in what is now Uttar Pradesh.
The Brahmo Sabha was revived by Debendranath Tagore, from a family of Bengali zamindars, who in 1841 renamed Roy’s organization the Brahmo Samaj (Society of Brahma) and wrote a statement of its beliefs.
He sent out missionaries who made many converts to his teachings in rural Bengal.
For some time, Tagore’s closest associate was an English-educated bank employee named Keshub Chunder Sen.
However, Tagore’s main interest was the modernization of theology and rituals, whereas Sen wanted to concentrate on abolishing what he regarded as social evils, such as the caste system, drinking, and inequality between men and women.
Sen founded the Brahmo Samaj of India and preached all over the subcontinent.
As this amounted to an exemption from Hindu law, it implied that Brahmos were not Hindus.
In the late 1870s, Sen lost interest in social reform.
Sen became more and more mystical.
Sen’s Bengali contemporary Sri Ramakrishna taught that all religions were true.
This included Hinduism in its current forms, which meant there was no need for reform.
On his deathbed in 1886, Ramakrishna chose as his heir Narendranath Datta, later called Swami Vivekananda (joyful conscience).
In 1893, Vivekananda left India to attend a gathering in Chicago called the World Parliament of Religions.
On his return home in 1897, he founded the Ramakrishna Mission to propagate his ideas, which combined social service (such as helping the poor or organizing relief after earthquakes) with teaching the Upanishads and running spiritual retreats.
The Ramakrishna Mission was active in India and the United States from the time of Swami Vivekananda, and later spread to other countries.
Another reformer, Swami Dayananda Saraswati, found true Hinduism in the Vedas.
He called on middle-class Hindus in Bombay to renounce post-Vedic accretions (such as image worship, the intercession of priests, and pilgrimages) and to worship his one all-knowing and merciful God.
In 1875, Dayananda founded the Bombay Arya Samaj (Society of Aryans) to spread his ideas.
Two years later he moved to Lahore in Punjab, where he established a new Arya Samaj.
By the time of Dayananda’s death in 1883, local Arya Samajas existed across northern and western India.
They commemorated their founder with the Dayananda Anglo-Vedic College, a high school and college at Lahore that taught English literature, science, and social studies alongside Sanskrit and Hindi.
(The Arya Samaj encouraged Hindus to speak Hindi, leading many of its members to join the campaign against Urdu in the administration and the courts.) The Arya Samaj had great influence, especially in Punjab, and by 1947 there were between 1.5 and 2 million Aryas.
By the late nineteenth century, the census showed a sharp increase in the number of Christians and Sikhs in Punjab, and the goal of the Arya missionaries was to win back to the Hindu fold those who had converted to other religions.
In 1875, the Russian Helena Petrovna Blavatsky and the American Henry Steel Olcott founded the Theosophical Society in New York.
Theosophy, or the Wisdom of God, began as an offshoot of Western occultism, but Blavatsky and Olcott became increasingly interested in Hinduism.
They corresponded with Dayananda Saraswati, declared the Theosophical Society to be a branch of the Arya Samaj, and moved to India.
The alliance with Dayananda did not last, mainly because Theosophists rejected Arya criticisms of modern Hindu practices.
In 1882, Blavatsky and Olcott withdrew from the Arya Samaj and settled near Madras.
By now, Theosophy taught the existence of a universal soul, like Brahman in the Upanishads, which our individual souls left to come down into the world.
The secret of how we can return to the universal soul is guarded by spirits called Mahatmas (Sanskrit for “great souls”), who communicated it to mortals through their medium, Blavatsky.
In 1884, Blavatsky left India following accusations that her séances with the Mahatmas were rigged, and Olcott became leader of the Theosophists.
He traveled around India and made many converts, including  Britons and Hindus.
In 1907 he was succeeded by an Irishwoman named Annie Besant.
Besant focused on social work, such as education and the elimination of child marriage.
The movement flourished under her leadership, but eventually declined after an Indian named Krishnamurti renounced the role of Messiah that Theosophy had accorded him.
Nevertheless, by attracting Westerners to beliefs that drew on Hindu motifs, Theosophy gave many Hindus a renewed confidence in their culture.
The line between Hinduism and Sikhism had always been ill-defined.
Many Sikhs considered themselves to be followers of a Hindu sect rather than a distinct religion, and united the teachings of their gurus with polytheism, image worship, and a reliance on Brahmin priests to perform their rituals.
Partly in response to the claims of Hindu reformers that Sikhism was simply one more corrupt form of Hinduism, some nineteenth-century Sikh teachers sought to harden religious boundaries by purging their faith of Hindu elements.
In 1873, a group of prominent Sikhs in Amritsar founded the Amritsar Singh Sabha.
Its goals were to teach their people about their religion, to win back Sikhs who had converted to Christianity and Islam, and to provide Sikh children with Western education.
From 1879, Singh Sabhas were founded in other cities.
The Singh Sabhas insisted that all Sikhs accept the teachings of the last human guru, Gobind Singh.
This was successful, and the percentage of Sikhs who identified themselves as members of Gobind Singh’s Khalsa rose from seventy in 1881 to ninety in 1931.
The Singh Sabhas also published historical and literary works that emphasized the distinctiveness of Sikhism, and campaigned against practices that were not sanctioned by the Sikh scriptures.
The census reveals a measure of their success in separating Sikhism from Hinduism: In 1881, 54 percent of Punjabi Jats (the main peasant caste of Punjab) identified themselves as Sikhs, and most of the rest as Hindus.
In 1931, however, 80 percent of Jats called themselves Sikhs.
This was not because they formally converted from Hinduism to Sikhism, but because the reformers convinced them that the two faiths were mutually exclusive.
This points to a major effect of Indian socioreligious reform movements: They sharpened religious divisions.
At the popular level, Hinduism, Islam, and Sikhism had often shaded into one another.
Nineteenth-century Jats were not alone in being vague about their religious affiliation; Hindus and Muslims in Eastern Bengal often shared more customs and beliefs with one another than they did with their nominal coreligionists elsewhere.
Thanks to the Faraizis, the Arya Samaj, the Singh Sabhas, and other likeminded groups, however, Indians increasingly identified themselves as Hindus, Muslims, or Sikhs, different from people of other religions (even near neighbors), while having something in common with all members of their own religion.
INDIAN NATIONALISM Caste was another identity that changed under British rule.
With few exceptions, Hindus traditionally saw their own castes in relation to the communities that they lived among rather than as part of a wider group.
Caste associations increasingly lobbied the government in pursuit of their interests.
For centuries, Hinduism had given a sense of unity to some Indians.
Nationalism is based on the idea that individuals are part of a group called a nation, united by a common history, language, and culture.
Many speakers of Dravidian languages in South India came to see themselves as a nation, oppressed by the Hindu religion of the North and its Brahmin agents.
For example, Jana Gana Mana, now the national anthem of India, was written by modern India’s greatest poet, Rabindranath Tagore.
Rabindranath, the son of Debendranath Tagore of the Brahmo Samaj, was the winner of the 1913 Nobel Prize in Literature.
Jana Gana Mana celebrates the common Indian-ness of the whole subcontinent: Punjab, Sindh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, the South, Orissa, Bengal; The Vindhyas, the Himalayas, the Yamuna, the Ganges; The waves of the Indian Ocean.
Opposing these secular nationalisms, Hindu nationalists asserted that Hinduism was a foundation for not merely the cultural unity of the subcontinent but a modern Indian nation.
The differences among all these strains of nationalists are illustrated in their attitudes to the seventeenthcentury Maratha king Shivaji.
To non-Brahmins, Shivaji was a valiant enemy of upper-caste privileges.
In the 1860s, Indians were admitted to the formal structures of government in British India with the establishment of local boards.
One of their concerns surrounded the highest level of government employment, the Indian Civil Service or ICS.
The educated also wanted a part in lawmaking in British India.
In India, such bodies as the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha or Association of All the People of the city of Poona petitioned the government on the ICS, the councils, and other issues.
THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS In 1883, the government of India unveiled the Ilbert Bill, a proposal to rescind the right that Europeans in rural Bengal enjoyed not to be tried by an Indian judge if they landed in court.
Bengal’s British businessmen and planters were outraged, claiming that Indian judges did not share Western conceptions of right and wrong.
They launched a campaign of petitions, speeches, and lobbying, until the government watered down the Ilbert Bill to their satisfaction.
They called themselves the Indian National Congress, or Congress, and from then on met in a different city each year during the Christmas vacation.
(It must be made clear that in India, Congress is the name of an organization, which became a political party, and not a law-making branch of government like the United States Congress.) The principal organizers of Congress included Allan Octavian Hume, a British Theosophist and retired officer of the ICS, who supported the demands of educated Indians; Pherozeshah Mehta, a Bombay lawyer; and Surendranath Banerjea, a Bengali and one of the first Indians to pass the ICS examination.
Mehta and Banerjea were disciples of Dadabhai Naoroji, a London-based businessman and intellectual from Bombay whose books and articles are some of the clearest expositions of nineteenth-century Indian nationalism.
Congress set itself two tasks: to raise money with which to publicize its grievances in Britain, and to drum up Indian support for reforms.
In their effort to retain the loyalty of leading Indians, the British went some way toward meeting Congress demands.
The early Congress came to life only during its annual meetings.
Most meetings attracted fewer than a thousand delegates, and the largest number of them were Brahmin lawyers from the big cities of the Bengal, Bombay, and Madras provinces, classic members of the English-educated elite but hardly typical of Indians in general.
THE PARTITION OF BENGAL In 1903, the viceroy Lord Curzon announced that to simplify the administration and aid economic development, the huge province of Bengal would be divided in two.
English-educated Bengali Hindus were enraged at the move, which many believed was punishment for their sup- port of Congress.
They foresaw a decline in opportunities for advancement, as they would constitute minorities in both new provinces: Eastern Bengal (modern Bangladesh and northeastern India) would be inhabited mainly by Assamese and by Muslim Bengalis; most of the people of the western province (West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, and most of Orissa) would be Biharis and Oriyas.
The Calcutta elite fought partition with meetings and petitions, but the British were undaunted, and Bengal was divided in 1905.
In the hopes of forcing the British to listen by hurting them economically, they burned imported fabric and picketed shops that sold it.
They drummed up wider support for swadeshi with newspapers, pamphlets, and traveling theatrical troupes and sent volunteer speakers (especially students) into the Bengal countryside.
The movement was phenomenally successful and led to a boom in sales of Indian cloth.
At the 1906 session of Congress, a dissident faction under Bal Gangadhar Tilak saw a chance to hijack Congress from its leaders Surendranath Banerjea and Gopal Krishna Gokhale (Pherozeshah Mehta’s successor).
Thanks to the excitement over the situation in Bengal, Tilak’s resolutions passed.
This split Congress.
The Moderates under Banerjea and Gokhale opposed the partition of Bengal, but saw good relations with the British as the key to resolving Indian grievances.
He first called on Indians to make British rule impossible by refusing to work in the army or the government, or pay taxes, then penned articles that seemed to endorse a terrorist movement that had launched bomb attacks in Bengal.
Gokhale consolidated his position as the dominant politician in India.
THE ALL-INDIA MUSLIM LEAGUE For various reasons, Congress had never attracted many Muslims.
Muslims were poorly represented among the English-educated classes  of Bengal, Bombay, and Madras from which Congress drew much of its support, and were further alienated by the fact that Hindu supporters of Congress were prominent in the movement to replace Urdu with Hindi.
Many agreed with Sir Syed Ahmed Khan that participation in Congress would earn Muslims nothing but British hostility.
In 1906, the viceroy Lord Minto met a group of prominent Muslims to discuss the Indian policy of the newly elected government in Britain.
Perhaps as a ploy to secure support against the agitation in Bengal— perhaps not—Minto promised that any reforms in India would take account of Muslim interests.
Soon afterward, the Muslims who had met the viceroy formed the All-India Muslim League, modeled on Congress.
Their main goal was separate electorates for Muslims.
This meant that Muslims would vote separately from other Indians, and for their own candidates, as a means of guaranteeing representation even in areas where they were a minority.
Separate electorates already existed in elections for some local boards, and the League wanted them made general.
THE MORLEY-MINTO REFORMS Electoral questions were important because Lord Morley, the Secretary of State for India in the new British government, was planning the most far-reaching constitutional changes that India had seen since 1858.
The resulting Morley-Minto Reforms link his name with that of the viceroy, but the Congress leader Gokhale seems to have influenced the Secretary of State more than Minto did.
Probably thanks to Gokhale, Morley went far to meet the demands of the Moderates, to show India that there was no need to adopt Tilak’s methods.
A majority of their members would now be Indians, most of them elected by such interest groups as landowners and Muslims (who obtained their separate electorates).
Besides the Moderates, Morley and Minto courted the princes and chiefs, the rulers of the third of the subcontinent that formed Indian India.
In 1909, Minto eliminated this source of friction when he informed the princes that they would henceforth be allowed to rule their states more or less as they saw fit.
Finally, in 1912 the British reunited the Bengali-speaking region.
This abolished the mainly Muslim province of East Bengal.
To compensate the subcontinent’s Muslims, the capital of India was moved from Calcutta to the old Muslim center of Delhi, where a planned city of New Delhi was built.
This did not satisfy the Muslim League, but the policy of Morley and Minto showed that in British eyes, the two principal forces in Indian public life were Congress and the princes.
7 The Struggle for Independence WORLD WAR I Britain’s declaration of war on Germany in 1914 brought the whole British empire into World War I.
Many Indian politicians felt that, with improved access to the ICS and councils already achieved through the Morley-Minto reforms, their wartime sacrifices should be rewarded with self-government or home rule.
The Muslim League had already declared itself in favor of self-government in 1913.
Its members were angry over the reunification of Bengal (which eliminated the mainly Muslim prov-  ince of Eastern Bengal) and Britain’s refusal to help Turkey against attacks by Italy and the Balkan states shortly before the oubtreak of World War I.
In 1915, Congress too approved a call for self-government.
The same year, Pherozeshah Mehta and Gopal Krishna Gokhale, two principal leaders of Congress since its establishment in 1885, both died.
The rising stars of the new Indian freedom movement were Annie Besant, leader of Theosophists, who believed that self-government would restore the Hindu India that so influenced her religion; and Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Gokhale’s old Extremist opponent, who had been released from prison in 1914.
In 1916, Besant and Tilak both founded Home Rule Leagues.
Thanks to Besant’s Theosophical links and Tilak’s popularity among former Extremists, the two Leagues grew rapidly.
They attracted people who had not hitherto been involved in nationalist politics—non-Brahmins, petty merchants, rich farmers, students—and drew them into Congress, to which Besant and Tilak both belonged.
In 1915, the government of India supplemented its powers of repression with the Defense of India Act, which allowed it to ban books deemed seditious, control newspapers, and intern critics of the government.
Among those interned were Annie Besant, and Mohamed Ali and Shaukat Ali, two brothers who were among the leading Muslim politicians in India.
The deaths of Mehta and Gokhale, and the influx of supporters from his Home Rule League, allowed Tilak to take center stage when Congress held its annual meeting in 1916.
The gathering was in Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh, where (by prior arrangement) the Muslim League was meeting simultaneously.
Under an agreement called the Lucknow Pact, the two parties presented joint demands to the British: an increase in the number of voters; refashioned legislative councils, with four fifths of the members elected rather than appointed, and executive councils on which half the members were responsible to the legislative councils; equality between Indians and other inhabitants of the British Empire, particularly the right to live anywhere in the empire (including the dominions that excluded them) and to receive military commissions on equal terms with Britons.
The alliance with the League allowed Congress to claim to represent Muslims, and so enhanced its right to negotiate with the British on behalf of all Indians.
The League secured Congress recognition that Muslims were different from other Indians, as in the Pact Congress accepted separate electorates and “weighted” representation.
This meant that in the legislatures at the center and in most provinces, where Hindus formed the majority, Muslims would have more seats than their population warranted; in Punjab and Bengal, with their slight Muslim majorities, Hindus would be overrepresented.
Lord Chelmsford, the British viceroy of India, and the Secretary of State in London were meanwhile trying to defuse the demand for home rule with concessions to Indian opinion.
In 1917, the two principal forces in Indian public life were admitted to a meeting of the British and dominion prime ministers in London, in the persons of Satyendra Prasanna Sinha, a former president of Congress, and Maharaja Ganga Singh of Bikaner, a leading prince.
On August 20, 1917, after consulting Sinha, Bikaner, and his colleagues in the British cabinet, the Secretary of State, Edwin Montagu, announced that Indian participation in the administration would gradually increase, until the government of India was fully responsible to an elected legislature.
Montagu and Chelmsford now toured India to hear the opinions of Indians and Europeans, then drafted a scheme to set the country on the path to responsible government.
Their Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms were enacted by the British parliament in 1919.
This met many (though not all) of the demands of the Lucknow Pact, with which the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms also accorded in increasing Indian representation among military and ICS officers, and enlarging the electoral franchise.
Muslims kept the separate electorates that had been granted in 1909 and approved by Congress in 1916.
In 1921, in accordance with a suggestion made by Montagu and Chelmsford, a Chamber of Princes was established, in which the princes met periodically both to discuss matters of common concern and to advise their British overlords.
In an effort to maintain Indian support for British control, the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms gave unprecedented power to Indian politicians and accorded the princes greater autonomy than at any time since the early nineteenth century.
In December 1919, the members of Congress approved the reforms and voted to participate in the next year’s legislative elections.
MAHATMA GANDHI Unlike the men who dominated Congress during its first thirty years, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was a product of Indian India, born in 1869 in a small kingdom in Gujarat.
In 1907, however, these lawful methods proved ineffective against new regulations that required Indians to carry identity cards and restricted their movements.
Satyagraha was Gandhi’s method of resolving conflict without violence.
The strength of character that he showed in South Africa earned Gandhi the name of Mahatma, or great soul (the term was also used by Theosophists to refer to their supernatural beings).
Although he associated with Congress, however, he took little interest in politics.
He founded a new ashram and led several satyagrahas against socioeconomic injustice.
He did, however, call for satyagraha to protest the internment of Annie Besant and the Ali brothers.
Gandhi was a Hindu, but he hoped that his public support for the Alis, the two best-known Muslims in India, would help bring together his country’s two main religious communities.
Worried by the disturbances provoked by economic discontent, the viceroy’s legislative council passed the Rowlatt Acts.
These continued for three more years some of the repressive powers of the wartime Defense of India Act.
They were opposed by every Indian member of the legislative council, and only went through because with the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms not yet in effect, officials still formed a majority of councillors.
Gandhi was one of many Indians who denounced the Rowlatt Acts.
In Punjab, a tense climate arising from economic troubles and communal hostility resulted both in widespread observance of the hartal and in rioting.
The Mahatma called off his hartal, and the government of India and Congress both launched inquiries into the Amritsar Massacre.
Gandhi served on the Congress inquiry.
In April 1920 he formally entered politics when he took over leadership of Annie Besant’s Home Rule League, and in June he suggested that satyagraha could bring selfgovernment to India.
Conveniently, the Hindi for self-government is swaraj, the same word that Gandhi used for self-control.
THE NONCOOPERATION CAMPAIGN With its defeat in World War I, Turkey lost the Muslim holy cities of Mecca, Medina, and Jerusalem.
Muslims who regarded the sultan of Turkey as their khalifa felt that this endangered the holy places, and in 1919 the Ali brothers (who had been freed from internment when the war ended) became the leaders of an Indian Khilafat Movement to lobby on behalf of Turkey.
(The khilafat is the office of khalifa.) The following year, Gandhi announced his support for the movement.
The Ali brothers agreed to a combined self-government and khilafat satyagraha, and in August 1920 they and Gandhi began promoting their campaign.
By the end of 1920, Congress had endorsed noncooperation, thereby signaling its acceptance of Gandhi’s leadership.
The Mahatma was helped by a lack of rivals (Tilak died the day that Gandhi and the Alis began publicizing their campaign, and Annie Besant’s eccentricities had eroded her support).
Moreover, Gandhi managed to pack two Congress meetings with his followers, among them veterans of the indigo and mill satyagrahas, and Muslims who appreciated his efforts in the khilafat movement.
National leaders of Congress hoped that Gandhi’s khilafat connections would cement the Muslim support that they had pursued since the Lucknow Pact.
Provincial politicians expected rewards for handing the Mahatma control of Congress.
Gandhi took advantage of his newfound dominance to improve Congress’s efficiency by creating a full-time party executive or Working Committee.
He also tried to make the organization more representative by establishing local Congress branches and recruiting members from outside the English-educated urban classes that still predominated at the annual meetings.
Most members of Congress did boycott the 1920 elections, and attendance at schools and colleges fell.
During 1921, the popularity of swadeshi combined with economic problems to cut into sales of imported cloth.
Noncooperation was opposed by Liberals (political heirs of Gokhale, who had left Congress when Tilak rose to power); the remaining Congress Moderates, who wanted to work with the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms; and Hindu communalists, who disliked the commitment to the khilafat.
After a time, many Congress politicians wanted to end noncooperation and participate in electoral politics, the only access to power in an India that remained firmly under British rule.
But it had enrolled more people than ever before into a movement directed by Congress, which unquestionably had widespread if not universal support.
And it had cemented the position of Gandhi, the man who mobilized this power, as both the best-known man in India and the most important member of Congress.
POLITICS IN THE 1920s In 1923, legislative elections showed that Congress was strong in much of India.
In some places, however, the party was hurt by the enlarged franchise of the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms.
For example, Muslims formed a majority of the population of Bengal.
Poverty and low levels of education had hitherto left provincial politics in the hands of urban Bengali Hindus, a powerful force in Congress since its creation.
Now, Muslims dominated the electorate of Bengal and excluded Congress from power.
Similarly, in Madras province (Tamil Nadu and coastal Andhra Pradesh), the non-Brahmins’ Justice Party left the local Brahmindominated Congress far behind and won every election between 1920 and 1934.
And in Punjab, Muslim, Hindu, and Sikh landowners always ensured that their Unionist Party enjoyed sufficient support in rural areas to defeat the mainly urban Congress.
Indeed, Congress languished after 1922.
For example, one of the principal obstacles to his dream of Indian unity was Untouchability, discrimination against Untouchables by Hindus of higher castes.
The Mahatma joined a satyagraha to win Untouchables the right to walk on a road that passed a Hindu temple.
But without his political leadership, Congress’s membership and funds dropped, and many local branches ceased functioning.
Most of the party ignored Gandhi’s ideas about reconstructing society, which threatened the interests of both the small landholders and rich peasants who joined Congress after 1920, and the Indian industrialists who bankrolled their activities.
(Fortunately, Gandhi said that the rich should use their wealth to help the poor, but he opposed taking it from them against their wishes.) Congress members of the legislatures instead devoted themselves to nurturing power bases, which had to be considerably larger than in the days when electoral politics were confined to local boards.
By the end of the decade, adepts at this form of politics had established themselves as Congress provincial leaders.
Improved communications strengthened class, religious, and national identities and spread both discontent and political movements more rapidly than ever before.
New political movements that entered India after World War I included democratic socialism (modeled on the British Labour Party) and fascism.
Manabendra Nath Roy, the Bengali founder of the Communist Party of India, was so successful in his home province that in 2002 the Indian state of West Bengal was perhaps the only place in the world still under an elected Communist government.
Such movements often sanctioned violence to end British rule; Bhagat Singh, an atheist and a militant socialist, sought to  free India through bombing and assassination until he was captured and executed in 1931.
The tendency for people to identify themselves on the basis of religion seemed legitimized when the MorleyMinto Reforms, the Lucknow Pact, and the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms all accepted separate electorates for Muslims.
Meanwhile, many people saw the activities of Arya Samajists, Ahmadis, and other missionaries as attacks on the community being targeted for conversion.
All this meant that long-standing causes of religious tension, such as cow killing by Muslims, or noisy parades near mosques by Hindus, now often led to riot and murder.
The principal Hindu communal party, the All-India Hindu Mahasabha (Great Council), was founded in 1915 to coordinate Hindu organizations in North India and was reorganized as a political party in 1922.
Three years later Keshav Baliram Hedgewar, one of the Mahasabha’s leading intellectuals, founded the paramilitary Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) or National Volunteers’ Association to defend Hindus and Hinduism.
Hindu communalists were particularly active in British Indian provinces where Hindus were the minority (notably Punjab), and in areas of Indian India with Muslim rulers.
For some years the Arya Samaj focused its attentions on Hyderabad, where Hindus formed most of the population in a Muslim-ruled state.
This ended the alliance between Congress and the Muslim League, which had never found common ground beyond the question of the khilafat.
The same year, the League voted in favor of a federal form of government for the India of the future, with most powers exercised by the provinces, and continued separate electorates.
The first provision would assure Muslims control of provinces where they were the majority, the second would guarantee them representation in mainly Hindu provinces.
But in the 1920s, the League did not speak for all Muslims.
A few “nationalist” Muslims stayed in Congress, where they were prized as a sign that the party represented all Indians.
Most Muslims supported regional parties such as the Unionists in Punjab.
Even within the League, there were disagreements.
Muhammad Ali Jinnah, of whom more will be said later, argued that separate provincial electorates were of less value than a guaranteed number of seats in the federal legislature, and the creation of more Muslim-majority provinces.
(The British acceded to the latter demand in the 1930s, with the establishment of the Northwest Frontier Province—hitherto administered directly from Delhi—and Sindh.) The Shiromani Akali Dal, the Supreme Army of the Immortals, which is still the principal Sikh communal party in India, originated in a struggle for control over gurdwaras (Sikh temples).
The Shiromani Akali Dal was the reformers’ instrument.
Congress, Hindu communal parties, and a section of the Muslim League met to discuss their reaction.
This Indian committee was headed by Motilal Nehru, a leading member of Congress.
Its Nehru Report demanded immediate dominion status.
The meaning of this term had changed since World War I.
But the Nehru Report did not please all Indians.
Within Congress, a group of radicals led by Subhas Chandra Bose and Motilal Nehru’s son Jawaharlal opposed sharing even a monarch with Britain.
This raised the possibility that Congress might split, under circumstances that would be personally painful for the president of its meeting in 1928, Motilal Nehru.
Indian revenues still poured into Britain in the form of the Home Charges, and the subcontinent retained its psychological importance as a sign of British power.
In an effort to win back the cooperation of Indian leaders, Lord Irwin, the viceroy, persuaded the British government to confirm that India would indeed become a dominion one day, to shelve the Simon report, and to invite the Indian political parties and princes to a Round Table Conference in London.
This worsened the danger of a split in Congress: Within the party, there was disagreement over whether to join the talks in London, and whether to work with whatever reforms emerged from the conference.
Gandhi decided on a new satyagraha to unite Congress and ensure his dominance.
Assuming that it secured the public support that noncooperation had attracted ten years earlier, it would also remind the British that Congress could mobilize more people than any other organization in the country.
After a satyagraha, Gandhi could brush aside Congress opponents of dominion status and the Round Table Conference, go to London, and use his mass support in India to extract a maximum of concessions.
Because the new satyagraha was intended to strengthen Gandhi’s hand at the Round Table Conference, there was no need for it to chal- lenge British rule in India.
Other Congress leaders organized the next stage of civil disobedience, which included boycotting both imported goods (especially cloth) and the 1930 legislative elections.
As in 1920, participants were often motivated by grievances of their own, frequently economic, but the important thing was that they supported a movement directed by Congress.
Membership in Congress grew rapidly.
Meanwhile, the Round Table Conference had brought together members of the British parliament (led by the prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald), the leaders of the political parties of British India with the exception of Congress, and representatives of the princes.
To forestall this, the princes called for a federation of the British Indian provinces with their states.
It would also give the princes a voice in the central legislature and executive of India, which under the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms represented only British India.
The other British Indian parties at the  conference saw federation as a small price for the support of the princes and the Muslims in constitutional reform.
Many British politicians hoped that a federal system would dilute the power of Congress in the central legislature, as the main party of British India as yet had little support in the princes’ Indian India.
Irwin and MacDonald had expected the Round Table Conference to discuss general principles, which did not require the participation of Congress.
But the federation would not work unless Congress accepted it, and this would only happen if the party were part of the constitutional discussions.
The Mahatma was as keen on negotiations as Irwin.
In return, Gandhi ended the satyagraha, retracted Congress’s demand for immediate dominion status, and agreed to attend the constitutional discussions.
Congress and Gandhi enjoyed the support of many Indians, but—as the 1930s showed—not all.
When the Round Table Conference reopened, the parties representing communal minorities (including Muslims, Sikhs, and Untouchables) made it clear that the Mahatma did not speak for them.
Then, on his return home in December 1931, Gandhi found that many members of Congress were ignoring his pact with Irwin and continuing the satyagraha.
This left him with a choice between disowning those who persisted in civil disobedience and thus splitting Congress, or officially resuming the satyagraha so as to reincorporate the dissidents in the party.
THE NEW CONSTITUTION By the end of 1932, the Round Table Conference had hammered out the framework of the new constitution, which now went to the British parliament.
After lengthy delays (many of them caused by right-wingers who opposed any loosening of ties between Britain and India), the reforms were implemented after parliament passed the Government of India Act in 1935.
This they could obtain only by surrendering the provinces of British India to the elected politicians whom so many Indians now accepted as their rightful leaders.
Sikhs, Indian Christians, and a number of other communities were granted separate electorates alongside Muslims.
MacDonald had also offered separate electorates to the Untouchables.
Gandhi opposed this, arguing that it would further divide Untouchables from other Hindus and reduce the incentive for the latter to improve their treatment of Untouchables.
The Mahatma went on a hunger strike, until the Untouchable leader Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar turned down the offer of separate electorates.
The two men agreed instead that in constituencies with large populations of Untouchables, the latter would provide all the candidates for elections.
The divided authority that had existed in the provinces under the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms was now implemented at the federal level: India’s internal affairs would be transferred to ministers responsible to a federal legislature, and the viceroy and his appointed executive councillors retained responsibility for defense and external affairs.
It has already been noted that the federal government was to have authority over, and include representatives of, the states of Indian India as well as the provinces of British India.
The Government of India Act therefore provided that each prince would negotiate the terms of his accession to the federation.
The federal legislature and executive would only come into operation when enough princes had acceded; until then, the central government would operate under the Montagu-Chelmsford system.
The same rich peasants were the backbone of Congress in rural areas, and among the beneficiaries of the widened electoral franchise of 1935.
In 1918, an Industrial Commission recommended that the central government encourage technical education and private investment in industry.
The Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms, however, transferred industrial policy to the provinces, which lacked the resources to do much.
Industry benefited by the institution of protective tariffs from 1923, and the government’s post–MontaguChelmsford policy of buying railway and other supplies in India wherever possible.
The Tatas, who began as traders, went into textiles and then into iron and steel, and in the 1940s inaugurated commercial domestic airline service in India.
The Birlas, a merchant family of eastern India, added jute processing in the 1920s and chemical industries in the 1930s.
The Tatas and Birlas were among the many Indian businessmen who gave financial support to Congress, while at the same time managing to retain the goodwill of the British.
Congress selected candidates whose caste or social status were electoral assets in their constituencies, sent out its best speakers to campaign, and started a Mass Contact program to drum up popular support.
In the end, Congress dominated the new legislatures of eight of the eleven provinces of British India.
By the end of 1938, Congress prime ministers ruled all the provinces except Bengal, Punjab, and Sindh, which were controlled by regional parties.
There were many reasons for the popularity of Congress, which during the late 1930s enrolled more members than ever before.
For over fifty years, Congress had called itself the representative of the Indian people, many of whom had come to accept this claim.
Ambitious men joined Congress because it offered the surest route to power and influence, and the eclipse of other parties in 1937 brought new support from politicians and voters.
The rich peasants and urban pro-  fessionals who joined Congress to secure their own position made themselves indispensable to the party, as legislators and as intermediaries with the mass of the voting and nonvoting population.
The provincial prime ministers and national leaders could not afford to alienate these local “bosses,” who made sure that Congress refrained from interfering with their interests.
This was partly responsible for the most serious threat to face Congress in the 1930s.
Subhas Chandra Bose led a radical faction that wanted to commit Congress to a socialist redistribution of wealth to the poor after the end of British rule.
Meanwhile, Bose’s popularity grew among the Congress rank and file, who chose him as party president for 1938.
Gandhi made it clear that he would tolerate Bose as president for only one year.
When Bose ran for reelection and won, the Mahatma took action to keep the essential support of the conservative bosses.
Gandhi’s supporters dominated the Congress Working Committee, the party executive, which on his instructions refused to work with Bose.
In mid-1939, Bose gave up trying to run Congress on his own and resigned the presidency.
THE MUSLIM LEAGUE IN THE LATE 1930s Meanwhile, the Muslim League was being transformed by Muhammad Ali Jinnah, a lawyer who was probably born in 1876.
Jinnah began his career as one of the comparatively few Muslim members of Congress, and by the time he was elected to the central Legislative Council in 1910 was the right-hand man of the Congress leader Gokhale.
Three years later he joined the Muslim League in order to bring the two parties together, and as a member of both Congress and the League he played a central role in negotiating the Lucknow Pact.
An old-style Moderate, Jinnah believed in working with the system, and he drifted away from Congress after it approved the noncooperation campaign in 1920.
Over the next few years he became increasingly worried by what he saw as a Hindu communal streak in Congress, symbolized when the party endorsed the Nehru Report, which rejected constitutional safeguards for Muslims in an independent India.
In 1935, the impending transfer of provincial power to prime ministers who would inevitably mostly belong to Congress induced Jinnah to accept an invitation to assume leadership of the Muslim League.
He believed that a strong League was his community’s best defense against discrimination.
Fortunately, Jinnah managed to persuade the new prime ministers of Bengal and Punjab (both Muslims from regional parties) to join the League.
The two prime ministers continued to head their own parties within their provinces, and only identified themselves as Leaguers when they were in other parts of India.
The alliance with Jinnah gave them links to a nationwide party, but did not require them to accept its dictation.
The elections did, however, show that most Muslim voters shared Jinnah’s suspicions of Congress, which fared poorly in Muslim constituencies.
He had no formal office in Congress, and relied heavily on his acknowledged political heir, Motilal Nehru’s son Jawaharlal.
This probably helped ensure that Jawaharlal did not follow his old comrade Bose in challenging the Mahatma, and made him an important figure in Congress’s national leadership.
This made him dismiss the fears of Indian Muslims about being a permanent minority in a democratic country, which in turn increased their feeling that Congress could never represent them.
Other Congress leaders were either insensitive to Muslim concerns, or open Hindu communalists.
Some of the new provincial governments promoted the Hindi language at the expense of Urdu.
Congress’s reverence for Gandhi alienated many Muslims, who regarded the Mahatma as a typical Hindu holy man.
And in 1937, bosses who wanted the party to remain Hindu in complexion helped scuttle a drive to recruit Muslims to Congress.
All this gave Jinnah ammunition with which to persuade Muslims that they were under attack, and that only the League could save them.
Thanks partly to this, more and more Muslims came to share Jinnah’s conviction that their community would need iron-clad safeguards against discrimination when the British left.
Until now, Congress had confined its activities to British India.
Bose and other dissidents realized that if they joined the agitators in Indian India, they might build power bases from which to take over Congress.
Gandhi and the Congress leadership defused this danger by formally extending support to the state movements.
To prevent Congress from gaining a foothold in the states, the British decided to remove any cause for complaint among the princes’ subjects.
WORLD WAR II After 1937, Congress provincial ministers and legislators established good relations with their British governors and the British-controlled central government.
Other members of the party, including some national leaders, did not understand that this was necessary if Congress was to enjoy the fruits of its electoral victories.
By mid-1939, Congress was again facing a split.
In September 1939, World War II began when Britain declared war on Germany.
The viceroy Lord Linlithgow announced that, as in 1914, India was automatically a belligerent.
At the orders of their national leaders, who wanted a breathing space to resolve internal party tensions, the eight Congress provincial governments resigned.
Their pretext was that Linlithgow should have consulted Indian politicians before making his announcement.
In August 1940, to secure support for the war effort from the politicians whom so many Indians now regarded as their leaders, Linlithgow offered to appoint representatives of Congress, the League, and other parties to his executive council.
This provoked debate in Congress over whether to accept this opportunity for power in Delhi, or hold out for independence as the price of cooperation.
This time, Indians would court arrest through nonviolent resistance to the war effort, demonstrating the mass support that would give Congress leverage in future talks with the viceroy.
This satyagraha accomplished little beyond the imprisonment of the principal leaders of Congress, however.
The Muslim League, the Shiromani Akali Dal, and other parties supported the war effort.
Linlithgow ignored Congress and appointed new members to the executive council until it was almost entirely Indian in composition.
The meaning was obvious: The British would not transfer power to a purely Congress government, which would assuredly be rejected by most Muslims.
Linlithgow wanted to ensure the loyalty of the Muslims who made up a large part of the Indian Army, and the Muslim League had recently endorsed a new policy.
At a party meeting at Lahore in March 1940, Jinnah secured approval of a resolution stating that when India became free, its Muslims must have states where they were not under Hindu control.
This echoed a call made ten years earlier by the then-president of the League, the poet-philosopher Mohammad Iqbal.
Iqbal had urged the creation of a state in northwestern India where Muslims could rule themselves in accordance with Islamic principles.
Jinnah’s motivation was different.
Instead, he argued that the Muslims of India formed a nation of their own, which like any nation was entitled to a territorial base.
Neither Iqbal in 1930 nor Jinnah in 1940 made it clear whether their states were to be independent or members of an Indian federation, although it seems that both men inclined to the latter.
Jinnah said “states” in the plural, adding the northeast (Bengal and Assam, the latter having a Muslim population of about 25 percent) alongside Iqbal’s northwestern state (Punjab, Sindh, the Northwest Frontier Province).
This was soon forgotten, as Jinnah and his followers began to speak of the northeast and northwest as a single Muslim state.
Their dream was called Pakistan, a punning term coined by Muslim students in England in 1933 (it means “pure land,” and also combines letters from the names of the Muslim areas of the northwest: Punjab, the Afghan areas of the Frontier, Kashmir, and so on).
It has been suggested that Jinnah’s real goal was a maximum of con-  stitutional safeguards for his coreligionists, and that Pakistan was a bargaining counter that could be given up in return for special protection.
But the idea of a state where they were masters would appeal to Muslims who considered themselves victims of discrimination at the hands of Hindus.
Support for the idea would mean the growth of the League, the only party committed to Pakistan.
A strong League would strengthen Jinnah’s hand in any negotiations on the constitution of a free India.
At the same time, Jinnah’s declaration that Indian Muslims were a nation of their own denied Congress any right to speak for them, because Congress’s claim to represent Muslims assumed that they were part of the Indian nation whose interests the party advocated.
Sir Stafford Cripps, a cabinet minister and an old friend of Nehru, was dispatched to India to make terms with its politicians (the Congress leaders had been freed from prison).
Apparently on his own initiative, Cripps promised that in return for support of the war, India would become independent after hostilities had ended.
With the Lahore Resolution in mind, he also said that no area would be included in independent India without the approval of its inhabitants.
Possibly overestimating British desperation, Congress rejected the offer, and demanded immediate independence without the provision for any part of India to “opt out.” This Churchill and Linlithgow would not grant.
Congress, already torn over its reaction should the Japanese invade and now in danger of breaking up over the Cripps Offer, called for satyagraha to force the British to leave.
Gandhi, Nehru, and their colleagues were arrested and lost control of their “Quit India movement,” which slipped into the hands of local bosses and militants.
The situation was worst in Bengal, where the loss of Burmese rice fields and grain hoarding by merchants contributed to a million starvation deaths in 1943 (another 2 million Bengalis died from the effects of famine by 1946).
The Quit India satyagraha became the subcontinent’s greatest rebellion since 1857, and in some areas, government collapsed.
Meanwhile, Jinnah had been building support for the Muslim League.
The party had always been strongest in the mainly Hindu provinces, where Muslims were particularly fearful about discrimination.
If Pakistan was to exist, Jinnah needed to extend his authority to the Muslim majority provinces.
Congress inadvertently helped him, as the resignations of the Congress prime ministers and legislators in 1939 let League governments take office in Assam and the Northwest Frontier Province.
During the war, Muslim aristocrats and religious leaders in Sindh and Punjab switched their support from regional parties to the League, which they felt would best protect them against a Hindu central government in independent India.
In Bengal, the League was helped by the economic crisis, as Muslim peasants looked for its help against Hindu landowners and moneylenders.
By now, the League was undergoing the same sort of growth that Congress had seen in the 1930s, with politicians and local leaders flocking to a party that clearly had a future.
In 1942–1943, Jinnah had sufficient support in the legislatures of Sindh and Bengal to install members of the League as provincial prime ministers.
Because the prime minister of Punjab was also affiliated with the League, the League now controlled the five provinces that Jinnah demanded for Pakistan.
Support for the League almost inevitably meant support for Pakistan.
Jinnah skillfully played on the differences that set Muslims apart from other Indians.
These had often been negligible before the reform movements of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, but Jinnah used them to drive home the point that Indian Muslims were a nation.
Because the nation is a state of mind, Muslims who accepted Jinnah’s thesis really did become a separate nation rather than the minority community that they had considered themselves to be a few years earlier.
By the time the war ended in 1945, the Muslim League was a mass party.
Jinnah was the acknowledged leader of most Muslims, who looked to him to create Pakistan as a homeland for their nation.
TOWARD INDEPENDENCE Even if Cripps had not committed them to leaving India, the British in 1945 had fewer reasons for staying than at any time since the eighteenth century.
The Home Charges, one of the tangible benefits of im-  perial rule to survive the reforms of 1920s and 1930s, ceased to exist during World War II.
The sums were deducted from the Home Charges, until all of India’s debt to Britain was discharged.
By now, too, ordinary Britons were concentrating on making ends meet in the face of postwar economic hardship, and had little interest in holding India.
Businessmen felt that their economic interests would fare better in a friendly independent India than a hostile dependency; and intellectuals who a generation earlier would have regarded British rule as an instrument of progress declared their support for colonial nationalism.
These sentiments extended to Clement Attlee, the leader of the Labour Party, who in July 1945 replaced Churchill as prime minister.
In 1941, former Congress president Bose made his way through Afghanistan and the Soviet Union to Germany.
He then went to Southeast Asia, where he recruited Indian soldiers who had been captured by the Japanese into an Indian National Army.
Not all the Indian prisoners of war joined this INA, but Bose found enough men to assemble three divisions that joined an unsuccessful Japanese invasion of India.
Bose apparently died in an airplane crash in 1945, but the INA made it clear that the British could not count on the loyalty of Indian soldiers.
The Quit India rebellion was also a warning.
It failed because the imprisonment of the Congress leaders left it uncoordinated, and because during the war the British had the will and the manpower to suppress the disturbances.
All this meant that after 1945 the principal task of Lord Wavell, who had become viceroy two years earlier, was to make India independent.
Rather, Wavell had to find a formula for independence that was acceptable not only to Congress, the most popular party in India, but also to the Muslim League, which repre- sented the Muslims who, thanks to Cripps’s promise, were entitled to opt out of any plan they did not like.
Congress now needed someone who could negotiate the terms of independence.
This cemented the dominance of Jawaharlal Nehru, who had almost thirty years of experience at the top levels of the party and was the Mahatma’s political heir.
Jinnah vetoed Nehru’s plan to name a Muslim member to the council, on the grounds that this was mere tokenism directed against the League’s claim to speak for all Muslims.
Elections in the winter of 1945– 1946 proved that most Muslims now agreed with Jinnah: The League won every Muslim seat in the central legislature and 439 of the 494 provincial Muslim seats.
Congress, meanwhile, garnered massive support among non-Muslim voters, who gave it 91 percent of the non-Muslim seats at the center and returned it to power in eight provinces.
In 1946, Cripps returned to India with two fellow British cabinet ministers.
This Cabinet Mission proposed to devolve most powers of government to the provinces.
Nehru objected that these two groups included large areas where Hindus formed most of the population.
Because the majority of Indians supported Congress, and Congress opposed grouping, this meant that a Pakistan based on the Cabinet Mission proposals would not outlive British rule.
Jinnah therefore rejected the scheme.
He now spoke of a Pakistan that would be completely independent, and in August 1946 called on Muslims to do whatever was necessary to obtain it.
In Calcutta, this sparked street battles between Hindus and Muslims, and 4,000 people (mostly Muslim) died in the ensuing Great Calcutta Killing.
It was particularly severe in East Bengal (where Muslims were the majority) and Bihar (where they were the minority).
In early 1947, the center of violence shifted to Punjab,  which drifted into civil war between Muslims on one side and Hindus and Sikhs on the other.
Most Sikhs gave up the idea (mooted by Master Tara Singh of the Shiromani Akali Dal) of a Sikh state alongside Hindu India and Muslim Pakistan, and the Akali Dal allied itself with Congress.
If Jinnah saw Pakistan as a bargaining counter, he was now overplaying his hand.
Nehru and other members of Congress accepted.
Jinnah had to backtrack, and his nominees joined Nehru and his colleagues on the council.
But the Congress and League councillors could not work together, and the central government slid toward paralysis.
In February 1947, Attlee made a fresh start by dismissing Wavell as viceroy.
He replaced him with Lord Mountbatten.
Congress was now prepared to call Jinnah’s bluff, if it was a bluff.
This was partly because most of the Congress leaders were prepared to do anything to stop the communal violence.
Some, like Nehru, knew that Jinnah’s price for staying would be a federal government so weak that it would be unable to rebuild free India.
Others, among them the conservative party strongman Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, were probably happy to give up Muslim-majority areas as a way of reducing the size of a community that detracted from their vision of a Hindu India.
In April 1947, Nehru informed Mountbatten that Congress would accept an independent Pakistan, so long as it did not include territories with non-Muslim majorities.
The viceroy still hoped to revive the Cabinet Mission plan, but this was impossible.
On June 3 he announced that the British would leave India as soon as they could, and divide the provinces of British India between two independent dominions, India and Pakistan.
Lawmakers in Bengal and Punjab agreed to the division of their provinces along religious lines, and the electors of the North-West Frontier Province and the Muslim portions of Assam (both ruled by Congress governments since the last elections) voted in favor of inclusion in a Pakistan that would comprise two wings, separated by a thousand miles of Indian territory.
The Muslims of the Hindu-majority provinces, who had always been the League’s strongest supporters, were left in India.
There remained the question of Indian India.
The Cabinet Mission had stated that all ties between Britain and the princes would lapse with independence.
This body consisted mainly of delegates chosen by the provincial legislatures of British India, although the Muslim League refused to participate.
8 Building the New India THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA In 1947, Jawaharlal Nehru’s role in negotiating independence won him the post of India’s first prime minister.
But he had to share the government with his deputy prime minister, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Congress’s principal organizer, whose control over the party’s pyramid of committees running from Delhi to the villages gave him a solid power base.
Nehru led the left wing of Congress, committed to a modern, secular society; Patel represented the conservatives who wanted to rebuild India on its Hindu foundations.
The state of Kashmir (officially, Jammu and Kashmir), however, gave rise to what remains the greatest source of tension in South Asia.
In 1947, the mainly Muslim population of Kashmir was ruled by a Hindu prince, Maharaja Hari Singh.
His ancestor was Ranjit Singh’s nobleman Raja Gulab Singh, who had received the kingdom a century earlier after assisting the East  India Company’s invasion of the Sikh empire.
The partition of British India gave Kashmir borders with both India and Pakistan, but Hari Singh did not accede to either new country.
Pakistani volunteers flooded in to join the revolt, and Hari Singh appealed to India for help.
This was granted in return for Kashmir’s accession to India.
Indian troops stopped the Pakistani advance in this first Indo-Pakistani war, but not before Pakistan had won control over about a third of Kashmir.
India and Pakistan agreed that Kashmiris could vote on the future of their state, but they never agreed on the mechanics.
By the mid-1950s, India was unwilling to lose Kashmir by either war or votes, and dropped its support for a plebiscite.
Equally important was the realization that a vote by mainly Muslim Kashmir to secede from India and join Pakistan might seem to confirm Jinnah’s claim that South Asian Muslims formed a separate nation from their Hindu compatriots—a claim that India had never accepted.
As a result, to this day Kashmir is divided between India and Pakistan, each of which considers the other to be in illegal occupation of a portion of the state.
A thousand miles to the south, Hyderabad presented a reverse image of Kashmir.
There, a Hindu population was governed by a Muslim, Nizam Osman Ali Khan, descended from the eighteenth-century Mughal nobleman Nizam ul-Mulk.
India would not accept the nizam’s desire for an independent Hyderabad, and in September 1948 invaded Hyderabad to force Osman Ali Khan to accede.
This gave India overlordship over the last holdout in what had been Indian India.
By the time of the conquest of Hyderabad, however, Patel had moved beyond accession.
Perhaps fearing that the popularity of many princes and chiefs among their subjects threatened the dominance of Congress, he set about ending monarchy in India.
Most states were merged into larger units parallel to the provinces of the former British India.
This was followed by the largest transfer of population in the history of the world, as fearful Hindus and Sikhs fled Pakistan while Muslims left India.
Mahatma Gandhi spoke out against the carnage, particularly when the arrival of Hindu and Sikh refugees in Delhi sparked attacks on Muslims.
He tried to defuse communal hostility, which he linked with his government’s tardiness in dividing British Indian assets with Pakistan.
On January 30, 1948, however, he was assassinated by a Hindu who resented his attempts to accommodate Muslims.
To reassure those Muslims who wished to stay in India that they were welcome, the government committed itself to what it called “secularism.” This did not mean the separation of religion and politics, but rather assuring religious minorities the freedom to practice their faiths, even at the cost of exempting them from the law.
Ambedkar.
Like the 1935 Government of India Act (on which it was based), it provides for a division of the powers of government between the federal “Center” and states (which included both the old provinces of British India and what remained of Indian India).
Instead, there was a consensus that only a strong Center could safeguard independence and unity, maintain law and order, and carry out social and economic development.
(Partly in order to reconcile its inhabitants to their new Indian nationality, Kashmir was given a special autonomous status that limited the Center’s authority within the state.)  There was a general feeling in India that dominion status was not quite independence.
Like his British counterpart, the Indian prime minister derives his authority from a bicameral parliament, in this case consisting of the Lok Sabha (the “House of the People,” elected by popular vote) and the Rajya Sabha (the “Council of States,” most of whose members are chosen by state legislatures).
No party has won a majority of Lok Sabha seats since 1984, however, which means that would-be prime ministers must get support from other parties besides their own.
Congress had long opposed separate electorates for Muslims and other minorities, and they were now abolished.
To ensure representation for disadvantaged groups, however, the constitution borrowed the scheme introduced in 1935 following the agree- ment between Gandhi and Ambedkar: In certain constituencies, all candidates for election must be either Untouchables or Tribals.
The Untouchable and Tribal communities are described in a schedule (appendix) to the constitution, from which they are called Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The constitution explicitly bans discrimination against Untouchables.
It names other social and economic reforms in its Directive Principles, measures that the government should undertake for the benefit of poor and downtrodden groups.
Government in the states parallels that at the Center, with a governor (appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister) corresponding to the president, a chief minister replacing the provincial prime ministers of the 1935 constitution, a legislative assembly, and a High Court.
(Until 1956, governors in much of what had been Indian India were called rajpramukhs, and were chosen by former rulers rather than by the president.) Before 1971, elections for state assemblies were normally held simultaneously with Lok Sabha elections.
Many Indians felt that with independence, Hindi, the country’s most widely spoken language, should replace the English of their former rulers in the Central government, and the constitution accordingly declared Hindi to be India’s official language.
This meant that Hindi alone would be used in parliament and in all jobs under the control of the Center, from the bureaucracy to publicly owned enterprises.
Indians who spoke other languages objected that this would give Hindi-speakers an unfair advantage, and they secured a constitutional provision that English would be the working language of the Center until 1965.
It was hoped that by then, knowledge of Hindi would have spread.
In 1963, Parliament confirmed that Hindi would become the official language in 1965, but added that English would be used alongside it for at least ten years.
Even this was too much for many non-Hindi speakers, who wanted English to be kept  in perpetuity.
In 1966, a new language law therefore enshrined the joint use of English and Hindi in parliament and provided that all dealings between the Center and non–Hindi-speaking states would be conducted in English.
Since then, the huge Bollywood film industry has extended understanding of Hindi, but English remains the principal language of business, the professions, the higher bureaucracy, and elite schools and universities.
Examinations for jobs administered by the Center are offered in national languages, whose number has been increased to eighteen since 1950.
Sikhs had always been a scattered minority there.
In 1947–1948, however, the flight of Muslims to Pakistan and the arrival of Sikh refugees from the same country created a Sikh majority in the western part of India’s share of Punjab.
In the now mainly Sikh west of Indian Punjab, Punjabi was the predominant language, while in the east its place was taken by Hindi.
Proponents of a Sikh state accordingly pursued their objective by asking for the partition of Punjab into separate Punjabi and Hindi states.
In 1966, the Center finally agreed to a linguistic division of Punjab, largely in order to build support among Sikhs for the Congress government.
This created a new and much-shrunken Punjab, in which most of the population spoke Punjabi and a bare majority was Sikh, and the Hindi-speaking Haryana.
Meanwhile, a movement for independence had begun among the Naga Tribals of Assam, who felt themselves victimized by the Assamese majority in their state.
In the 1970s and 1980s, other Tribal groups in the northeast were given states of their own, and in 2000 the states of Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh were created for the Tribals of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh.
He dominated the Congress party’s politicians and its “organization” of cardcarrying members, and secured the election of supporters as presidents of both India and the party.
The party president was forced to resign, and Nehru assumed control of the Congress organization.
Nehru played a large part in leading Congress to victory, and this established his dominance over the party’s political wing.
Jawaharlal Nehru was born in a North Indian Brahmin family in 1889.
His father Motilal Nehru was a wealthy lawyer, anglicized in habits and ideas, and a Moderate member of Congress.
Motilal and Jawaharlal Nehru were among the many Indians who turned against the British during and after World War I, and they joined Gandhi’s satyagraha of 1920–1922.
During the 1920s, both Nehrus served as president of Congress.
Motilal wrote the Nehru Report, and engineered Mahatma Gandhi’s return to active politics in 1928.
During Nehru’s heyday in the 1950s, Congress was the strongest party in India.
Parliamentary and state elections were held in 1952, 1957, and  1962; Congress always won majorities in the Lok Sabha, and usually in the state legislatures.
This is part of the reason that the rich peasants were never able to get Congress to pursue their interests exclusively.) These party bosses delivered votes to would-be members of parliament and the state assemblies.
Whatever else may be said of it, this gave Congress politicians genuine grassroots support.
Congress’s voting base extended far beyond the party organization.
After independence, Congress secured the electoral support of religious minorities (especially Muslims) and many newly enfranchised poor people, often members of Scheduled Castes and Tribes.
Local bosses frequently left these voters little choice but to cast their ballots for Congress.
But Congress was never as strong as it looked.
The Communists, who supported a proSoviet foreign policy and a Stalinist crash program of heavy industrialization, were strongest in West Bengal and Kerala, where Congress had never established a firm base.
The Socialists were simply a faction of Congress until 1948, when Patel drove them out; their power centered in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, and they favored neutrality in the Cold War and economic development through small-scale industries.
On the right, the Swatantra (free) Party wanted a free market economy and diplomatic alignment with the United States; and the Jan Sangh or People’s Organization was devoted to upholding Hindu culture and the Hindi language, and opposed the Congress definition of secularism as special rights for non-Hindus.
Swatantra was particularly strong in the old states of Indian India.
The Jan Sangh centered in the Hindi-speaking area of northern and central India; it was allied with the paramilitary organization founded by Hedgewar in 1925, the RSS, whose members drummed up support for the party at election time.
Congress’s legislative majorities meant that Nehru could normally be generous to politicians from opposition parties, whom he allowed full participation in parliament and the state assemblies.
(This was also true of rank-and-file legislators from his own party: Nehru encouraged them to take an active part in lawmaking rather than simply rubber-stamp the decisions made by their leaders.) At the same time, the prime minister was always watchful for non-Congressmen who posed a real threat; he would either undermine them, not always in the most gentlemanly fashion, or lure them into joining his party.
PLANNED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT The keystone of Nehru’s economic policy was government-directed development.
Industrialization would create the wealth to give Indians health care and education and build a modern infrastructure; establish the economic self-sufficiency that would help protect the country’s political independence; and end the reliance on trading raw materials for finished goods that had led to the economic crises of the 1930s.
During World War II, limits had been placed on imports of consumer goods, mainly so that India-bound ships had room for matériel needed for the war effort.
The most distinctive feature of “Nehruvian” economic policy, however, was central planning.
In 1944, the British had established a Department of Planning and Development to discuss India’s postwar economic policy.
Its proposals ultimately gave rise to the National Planning Commission, created in 1950 to advise the government on questions of economic development.
As prime minister, Nehru was chairman of the Commission, which he allowed to make economic policy rather than simply advise.
The Commission spelled out its policy in its Five Year Plans, programs to foster economic growth over a period of five years.
The result was that although economic growth during the First Plan was not spectacular, it was adequate.
In 1956, an Industrial Policy Resolution divided Indian industry into three parts.
Agriculture remained stagnant, so total economic growth was modest.
At first, India drew on the Sterling Balances, the debt that Britain had run up during World War II, which it put toward imports from countries that used the pound.
Education, however, is a state responsibility, and most states lacked either the funds or the will to institute universal education.
Population growth outstripped food production, and from 1957, grain had to be imported in large quantities.
For many years, Congress had blamed this poverty on zamindars and other rural aristocrats who collected rent from the peasants and forwarded land revenue to the government.
This was a direct attack on the wealth of the rich peasants who were Congress stalwarts in the countryside, and most of the time they ensured that land reform did not hurt them.
FOREIGN POLICY Nehru and Jinnah hoped for friendship between India and Pakistan, but the events of 1947–1948 guaranteed a rocky relationship.
Nehru tried to recruit newly independent countries to his nonaligned movement, and to join him in working for development.
Portugal refused to cede Goa and other Indian territories that had been under its rule since the sixteenth century.
Nehru finally had enough; in 1961 his army invaded the Portuguese settlements, and after some loss of life, incorporated them in India.
The problem was that for implementation, he had to rely on the bureaucracy, and Congress’s state and local leaders.
The aftermath of independence, however, ruled out reforms, which would have antagonized the people whom the government needed to deal with refugees, communal violence, the merger of Indian India, and development.
The ICS was renamed the Indian Administrative Service, or IAS, and most of its British members retired.
The rich peasants among Congress politicians and bosses might eagerly cooperate in the abolition of zamindari rights, which eliminated their principal rivals in the countryside, just as urban professionals supported new university programs for their children.
But few Congress leaders were willing to work toward the socialistic society that Nehru wanted, as this would inevitably erode their own standing.
It launched reforms in land ownership and education, directly attacking the interests of local Congress strongmen.
Nehru was very reluctant to use the Center’s powers to interfere in state politics, but the Kerala Congress got the support of party bosses in other states.
They eventually forced Nehru to dismiss the Communist government, impose President’s Rule, and ensure that Congress won the ensuing election to the Kerala legislature.
The results of obstructionism can be seen in the fate of a reform to which Nehru attached great importance, raising the status of women and Scheduled Castes or SCs (the former Untouchables).
Even the franchise did not help much: Until the mid-1980s, Congress bosses were usually able to ensure that the former Untouchables voted for their party.
When the Chinese crushed the Tibetan revolt of 1959, Nehru granted the Dalai Lama refuge, but refused to criticize China’s policy.
Opposition politicians stepped up their criticism, and the prime minister’s support in Congress, parliament, and the cabinet weakened.
Nehru turned to a group of state bosses who became known as the Syndicate and were unimpeachably loyal to him.
He said that if he died in office, it would be up to the Congress members of parliament to choose a new party leader who (provided Congress retained its majority in the Lok Sabha) would automatically become prime minister.
Nehru’s dominance prevented the emergence of even an unofficial political heir, and throughout his tenure most of his principal colleagues were men of his generation who had been active in the nationalist movement.
The strongest of these was Morarji Desai, who was finance minister until 1963 when he became one of the cabinet ministers to be banished to the lower levels of the party organization by Nehru and the Syndicate.
At Nehru’s death, Desai staked his claim to the succession.
His plans were, however, blocked by the Syndicate bosses, who knew that the former finance minister would curb their power if he became prime minister.
This was Lal Bahadur Shastri, a quiet but respected member of Nehru’s cabinet, who became the second prime minister of independent India.
(Indira, as  she was known, was unrelated to Mahatma Gandhi: Her husband had been a Congress politician named Feroze Gandhi.) Shastri’s premiership was dominated by one issue: India’s relations with Pakistan.
In 1962–1963, the two neighbors held talks to try to resolve their differences, of which Kashmir was the most important.
By the time the talks ended in failure, the president of Pakistan, Mohammad Ayub Khan, realized that India planned to keep its portion of Kashmir forever.
Then, at the end of 1963, an Islamic relic was stolen from a mosque in the Kashmiri capital, Srinagar.
Angry Kashmiri Muslims protested the theft with demonstrations and riots that had anti-Indian overtones.
Ayub Khan took this as a sign of Kashmiri support for annexation to Pakistan, which he decided to bring about by military means.
As Ayub Khan had hoped, Shastri agreed to let an arbitrator determine the exact location of the border.
That summer, infiltrators entered Indian Kashmir from Pakistan to carry out acts of arson and sabotage, with which they hoped to incite a popular uprising.
The government of the Soviet Union invited Shastri and Ayub Khan to meet at the Soviet city of Tashkent and work out a permanent settlement to replace the cease-fire.
In January 1966, Shastri and Ayub Khan concluded an agreement that provided for all troops to withdraw to the positions they had held before the war, and committed the two leaders to working for friendly relations between their countries.
THE RISE OF INDIRA GANDHI The Congress members of parliament therefore had to choose a new prime minister for the second time in less than two years.
Morarji Desai was again the leading candidate.
The Syndicate, however, arranged the election of Indira Gandhi, who the party bosses thought would be too weak to resist their domination.
For the next six years, Indira, Desai, and the Syndicate struggled for control, until Indira outmaneuvered her rivals and assumed more power than any previous leader in Indian history.
Elections for the Lok Sabha and the state legislatures were due a year after Indira became prime minister.
The industrial expansion fueled by the Second and Third Five Year Plans was coming to an end, partly because the market for replacements for foreign imports could not grow indefinitely.
Agriculture was hit by a bad harvest in 1965–1966 and a severe drought in 1966– 1967, resulting in famine in the north, scarcity elsewhere, and high prices everywhere.
Heavy expenditure on defense since 1962 had drained India’s foreign currency reserves, which were further weakened by low sales of the country’s few exports.
Indira and her cabinet could not agree on how to handle the economic difficulties.
Inevitably, and not without justification, the Congress party was widely blamed for all this.
At the same time, some of Congress’s long-standing weaknesses now came to the surface.
There were constant factional struggles among bosses and politicians whose interests were incompatible, and Congress was increasingly unwilling to enact policies that would inevitably anger some of its diverse supporters.
The new entrants were typically “middle peasants,” members of agricultural castes that ranked between rural elites and the Scheduled Castes.
Their place in society was largely responsible for their political mobilization: They lacked the jobs, education, and power enjoyed by the higher or “Forward” castes, but—unlike most members of the Scheduled Castes—they had enough resources to be able to raise themselves.
They were commonly called Other Backward Classes, or OBCs.
In some states, they used this advantage to take over control of Congress from the Forward Castes.
Where this was impossible, they often formed their own parties, which could count on much of the OBC population as a “vote bank.” This created a distinctive feature of Indian state politics between the 1960s and the 1990s: a two-party system that pitted a national party,  Congress, against a party that existed only in the state in question, and drew its support from local OBCs.
Congress retained its majority in the Lok Sabha, but with only 54 percent of the seats compared to the 73 percent it had won in 1962.
The party lost heavily in the state legislatures, and non-Congress governments—usually from regional parties—assumed office in eight of the seventeen states that India then comprised.
In Punjab, which had had a Sikh majority in the population since the separation of Haryana four months earlier, the Sikhs’ Akali Dal formed a government for the first time.
The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (Dravidian Progressive Federation) or DMK took power in Madras, and showed its Tamil regionalist credentials by renaming the state Tamil Nadu or Tamil-land.
(The DMK and its offshoot the All-India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, AIADMK, named for a leader called C.N.
Annadurai, have ruled Tamil Nadu ever since.) The “Communist Party of India (Marxist),” which had broken away from the Communist Party of India in 1964, won control of the legislature of Kerala eight years after Nehru had dismissed the state’s last Communist government.
In Uttar Pradesh, the peasant leader Chaudhuri Charan Singh took his followers out of Congress and became chief minister.
His new Bharatiya Kranti Dal (Indian Revolution Party) joined with other North Indian peasant movements to form the Lok Dal, the People’s Party, which supported land ownership by peasants in opposition to both landlords and cooperatives.
The Syndicate blamed Congress’s loss of its monopoly of power on the alienation of the party’s conservatives, who looked to Morarji Desai as their leader, and forced Indira to bring her rival back into the cabinet as deputy prime minister and finance minister.
New Delhi then set about undermining the non-Congress state governments, usually by persuading legislators to withdraw their support so that the chief minister lost his majority and had to resign.
In February 1968, for example, this happened to Charan Singh of Uttar Pradesh; the Center put the state under President’s Rule for a year, then orchestrated a new election that Congress won.
After the elections, Indira, the Syndicate, and Desai schemed against one another to dominate the government.
The Syndicate selected Congress’s candidate, Neelam Sanjiva Reddy, a former president of the party.
Indira, however, put up her own candidate, the country’s former vice president, Varahagiri Venkata Giri, and made it clear that she regarded the presidential election as a test of strength between herself and the Syndicate.
At the same time, she struck against her other rival when she fired Desai as finance minister.
He angrily quit his other post, that of deputy prime minister, and aligned himself with the Syndicate.
Giri won narrowly, showing that Indira had more support among the country’s lawmakers than the Syndicate did.
The Congress bosses responded by announcing that Indira no longer belonged to their party.
They assumed that this would force the Congress members of the Lok Sabha to withdraw their support from her, depriving her of her majority and compelling her to resign as prime minister.
Indira, however, called on her followers to accompany her out of the bosses’ Congress.
The party split in two, as the Congress executive, legislators, and ordinary members joined either Indira’s Congress (R) (the R stood for Requisitioned, as Indira had launched her faction with a written order or requisition for her supporters to meet) or the Syndicate’s Congress (O) (Organization, because the power of the bosses derived from their control of the party organization).
Congress (R) had fewer than half the seats in the Lok Sabha.
Concessions in Punjab and Tamil Nadu secured the cooperation of the Akali Dal and the DMK.
The administration of Lyndon Johnson, however, tied the aid to economic reforms: New Delhi was forced to loosen its restrictions on foreign investment and devalue the Indian rupee in relation to other currencies.
During her struggle with the Syndicate, Indira made another gesture  to the left.
Some time earlier, Congress had voted to nationalize India’s large private banks so that they could be compelled to serve rural and small-business clients (many of whom were unable to open bank accounts or obtain bank loans).
The Syndicate had blocked implementation of the policy, but in July 1969 Indira suddenly used her powers as prime minister to nationalize the banks.
It was also a play for the support of OBCs and other poorer voters who had become disillusioned with Congress: They could interpret nationalization as a sign that the prime minister had their interests at heart.
Bank nationalization was a dramatic gesture, but one that carried few risks: The only people whose interests it adversely affected were the handful of bank owners, who were already more likely to support the Swatantra Party or Congress (O) than Congress (R).
The same was true of Indira’s policy toward the princes and chiefs who once governed Indian India.
In 1967, Congress voted to delete the constitutional provisions relating to privy purses and privileges, but (like bank nationalization) the decision was not implemented.
Many of them belonged to Congress, but not all did.
For example, the maharaja of Patna led the Swatantra Party to victory over Congress in Orissa, and became chief minister of his state.
When Indira’s government attempted to give parliament the power to amend the constitution’s Fundamental Rights (mainly to make it easier to nationalize property), the maharaja of Dhrangadhara, a member of the Lok Sabha, floated a plan under which the Fundamental Rights could only be altered with the approval of the voters.
Indira now fixed her sights on the princes, both to punish such political opponents as the maharajas of Patna and Dhrangadhara, and to demonstrate her leftist credentials.
In December 1970, in response to a petition from a group of princes including Dhrangadhara, the Supreme Court ruled that the president had acted illegally.
Indira acted immediately, arranging a Lok Sabha election for March 1971; for the first time since independence, it did not coincide with state legislative elections.
When the voting took place, Congress (O) and the other opposition parties lost heavily, while Congress (R) won two thirds of the seats in the Lok Sabha.
The Awami League (Common People’s League) won a majority in parliament, but the country’s president (Ayub Khan’s successor Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan), army, and political elites all opposed the formation of an Awami government.
This was because the Awami League was based in East Pakistan (the former East Bengal), and its victory signaled a shift in power from the Punjabis, Sindhis, and other West Pakistanis who had dominated Pakistan since 1947.
Mujibur Rahman, known as Sheikh Mujib, the head of the Awami League, was willing to settle for autonomy for East Pakistan rather than the prime ministership of the whole country, but this too was rejected by Yahya Khan.
When the president tried to crush the Awami League by imposing martial law on East Pakistan in March 1971, Sheikh Mujib declared his province independent under the name of Bangladesh.
A crackdown by Pakistani troops sent almost 10 million Bangladeshi refugees, most of them Hindus, across the border into India.
An angry Yahya Khan declared war on India in December 1971.
Throughout 1971, the United States therefore backed Yahya Khan against Sheikh Mujib’s demands.
Indira’s defeat of Pakistan, and her wooing of leftist and poor voters, won Congress (R) majorities in every legislature except that of Tamil Nadu.
INDIRA IN POWER Her battles with the Syndicate and Morarji Desai left Indira obsessed with the danger of rivals inside her own party.
She therefore set about filling the political and organizational wings of Congress (R) with people who were unquestionably loyal to her.
In the long run, however, this destroyed the grassroots base on which Congress had drawn since the 1930s.
In much of India, lower-level Congress committees disappeared altogether.
This meant that Congress (R) faced electoral disaster if anything happened to diminish Indira’s popularity, as there was no longer any effective party organization to prevent voters from turning to other parties.
The prime minister did not expect Congress backbenchers in the Lok Sabha to take an active part in debates; their function was to vote in favor of the government’s policies.
Indira’s method of dominating Congress and the states was ultimately counterproductive.
Denied access to power through Congress, trade unions, religious organizations, caste societies, and other nonpolitical bodies became increasingly vocal in pursuit of their interests.
Nationalization accomplished little, but more importantly it met with no significant opposition because—like the attack on the princes—it hurt so few people.
By undermining the Congress organization and the state governments, Indira had destroyed the only bodies that could have made her plans work over the objections of rich peasants and other vested interests, and she was no more successful at driving away poverty than her father had been.
In economic policy, Indira abandoned Nehru’s dream of transforming India with central planning.
For example, the population of India was now increasing so fast (there were almost 600 million people) that it ate up any economic growth that occurred.
This launched the “Green Revolution.” By 1970, India grew five times as much wheat as it had ten years earlier.
In the early 1970s, however, the impact of the Green Revolution was limited.
The Green Revolution made Punjab the richest state in India, but most of the gains went to the successful wheat farmers.
It also cemented the social and economic dominance of rich peasants in the northwest, while leaving the lives of poor and landless cultivators unchanged.
As the Green Revolution got underway, the concentration on highyield wheat led to a decline in the production of other grains.
Despite the surge in Indian patriotism that followed the tests, discontent mounted, thanks not only to the economic situation but also to the incompetence and corruption of many of Indira’s handpicked colleagues and chief ministers.
Another was a surge in the kind of extraparliamentary protest movements that India had known since the campaigns against the partition of Bengal.
By the 1960s, some protests had turned to violence, notably the various Communist terrorist cells collectively called Naxalites (from the Naxalbari area of West Bengal, where they first struck).
The 1970s saw violent and nonviolent protests against Indira and Congress state governments in many parts of India.
One of the most unpopular governments was that of Bihar, where a nonviolent movement was launched to force the resignation of an inept administration.
This set the stage for the return to politics of Jayaprakash Narayan.
A friend of Nehru, he was leader of the socialists within Congress in the 1930s and 1940s, until he was driven out of the party by Sardar Patel.
Meanwhile, Indira’s old rival Morarji Desai organized protests against the Gujarat state government.
Later in the year, J.P. and Desai joined forces and established the Janata Morcha or People’s Front.
The next day, the Janata Morcha won a majority in elections for the Gujarat legislature, which had been dissolved as a result of Desai’s agitation.
By now, J.P. and Desai had garnered support across the political spectrum, from the remnants of the now-fragmented Socialist party; Charan Singh and his Bharatiya Lok Dal (Indian People’s Party), formed in 1974 through the merger of the Lok Dal with a radical socialist group; and the Swatantra Party.
On June 25, the two Janata Morcha leaders organized a huge rally in New Delhi.
According to Indira, the Emergency was necessitated by the breakdown of order, by which she meant the strikes and protests of recent months.
She attacked the economic causes of discontent with a twentypoint program that included controls on wage and price increases (these quickly brought inflation under control) and further promises of land reform.
Indira said that the Emergency would be withdrawn once order was restored, but many of her actions suggested that she was creating a permanent dictatorship.
In 1976, she imposed President’s Rule on Tamil Nadu and Gujarat, the two states with non-Congress (R) governments, and postponed the Lok Sabha elections due the same year.
By now, Indira relied heavily for advice on the younger of her two sons, Sanjay Gandhi.
Sanjay had little use for the democratic forms that his grandfather had so carefully fostered, and transformed the Youth Congress into a private army to turn against his opponents.
His rise to power was a sign of a growing belief in a “Nehru-Gandhi dynasty.” For all but two years since independence, the country had been ruled by Nehru and Indira, and many now felt that their family was uniquely qualified to govern.
Thousands of poor people, mostly Muslims, saw their homes bulldozed and were forcibly removed to new residences miles from their places of work.
Their discontent spread among the Muslims of north India, who had faithfully supported Congress since 1947.
As a result, anger against Indira grew rather than receded during the Emergency.
In January 1977, convinced that she was as popular as she had been five years earlier in the wake of the Bangladesh war, Indira ended the Emergency, freed political prisoners, and scheduled a Lok Sabha election for March.
All the principal non-Congress parties except the Communists joined with J.P. and Desai’s Janata Morcha in an alliance called the Janata Party, People’s Party.
For many voters, the sole issue was the experiences of the Emergency.
Just before polling day, the Janata Party acquired a new ally when Jagjivan Ram, the country’s most important Scheduled Caste leader, resigned from Indira’s cabinet to support J.P. and Desai.
Many Scheduled Caste voters followed his lead.
When the votes were counted, Janata and its allies held two thirds of the seats in the Lok Sabha, and Congress (R) was reduced to little more than a quarter.
THE JANATA GOVERNMENT The Janata government started off badly, with a disagreement between Jagjivan Ram and Morarji Desai as to which of them should be prime minister.
With J.P.’s support, the eighty-one-year-old Desai won, but he had to share power with Chaudhuri Charan Singh, aged seventy-four, who assumed Sardar Patel’s old posts of deputy prime minister and home minister.
The new parliament rescinded the more authoritarian of  Indira’s constitutional amendments, and passed laws to make a future declaration of Emergency more difficult.
Desai left foreign policy in the hands of Atal Bihari Vajpayee of the Jan Sangh, who dropped Indira’s tilt toward the Soviet Union in favor of genuine nonalignment.
Charan Singh presided over an economic policy that centered on peasant agriculture and small-scale industry, and underlay the Sixth Five Year Plan from 1980 to 1985.
Some aspects of the Emergency had found favor with many Indians.
Whatever the intentions of J.P. and Desai, it was clear that many members regarded the Janata Party as a temporary alliance, which they could leave just as easily as they had joined it.
Relations between Desai and Charan Singh were especially acrimonious.
After one bad quarrel, Desai dismissed his deputy prime minister, losing Janata the support of the Bharatiya Lok Dal.
In July 1979, the coalition’s leftists grew concerned that Desai was leaning toward the Hindu nationalists of the Jan Sangh.
First the socialists and then the followers of J.P. withdrew their support, depriving the prime minister of his majority in the Lok Sabha.
On July 19, Desai resigned.
He was succeeded by Charan Singh, who was unable to cobble together a majority and in turn resigned after only three weeks.
Charan Singh remained as caretaker prime minister till the voting took place in January 1980.
In 1977, many leaders of Congress (R) had turned against Indira, whom they blamed for the victory of the Janata Party.
Indira and her followers responded by forming a new party, called Congress (I).
The “I” stood for Indira, making it clear that this was even more her vehicle than Congress (R) had been.
She was particularly eager to win back the support of Muslims and Scheduled Castes, whose desertion had been crucial to her loss in 1977.
The lethargy of Desai’s government contrasted sharply with Indira’s decisiveness.
By the time the voting took place, the Janata Party was on the verge of breaking up into its component parts.
Congress (I) won two thirds of the seats in the Lok Sabha, and Indira Gandhi was once again prime minister of India.
10 The Fall of the Nehru-Gandhi Dynasty THE DYNASTY After leading her new Congress (I) to victory in the Lok Sabha election of 1980, Indira Gandhi was prime minister of India until her death in 1984.
The Congress (I) organization, parliament, and the cabinet often seemed to have little purpose beyond glorifying Indira and Rajiv.
State governors were one agency that Indira and Rajiv used as instruments of Congress (I).
Drug lords and extortionists had the wealth and power to coerce or buy votes, and Congress (I) was only one of several political parties that welcomed such men into parliament and state legislatures in return for their support.
The pattern set by Sanjay Gandhi’s Youth Congress during the Emergency became normal: Most parties now recruited toughs from gangs, slums, and universities and set them against their enemies.
After 1977, non-Congress state administrations had revived the panchayat system of local councils to secure some power for themselves even if Congress returned to power.
Although a small community, the Sikhs formed a prominent one.
Sikh farmers were among the principal beneficiaries of the Green Revolution.
In the 1960s, many Sikhs migrated from Punjab to other parts of India, where they were heavily represented in fields ranging from the army officer corps to the taxi service in Delhi.
Many Sikhs were still not satisfied, however.
They wanted “their” Punjab to enjoy the same autonomy as India’s only Muslim-majority state, Kashmir.
Most Sikhs wanted exclusive possession of Chandigarh for Punjab.
The main political parties in Punjab were Congress and the Sikhs’ Shiromani Akali Dal.
After the split of Congress in 1969, Indira needed the support of the Akali Dal to keep her majority in the Lok Sabha, and she promised that Chandigarh would become part of Punjab in 1975.
Thereafter, relations between Indira and the Akali Dal deteriorated.
In 1973, the Sikh party passed the Anandpur Sahib Resolution, calling for an enlarged and autonomous Sikh state; in 1975, it was prominent in opposing the Emergency; in 1977, it demanded that the Center respect federalism, and hand over Chandigarh.
During the 1970s, many Sikhs transferred their loyalty from Congress to the Akali Dal.
Not surprisingly, after she regained power in 1980, Indira dismissed the Akali Dal government that had won the Punjab legislative election in 1977.
A fresh state election brought Congress (I) to power.
In 1982, Sant Harchand Singh Longowal, the leader of the Akali Dal, inaugurated a satyagraha to stop the canal project, and to force New Delhi to accept the Anandpur Sahib Resolution.
To Indira, the solution was to wean the Sikhs away from the Akali Dal.
During the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the great majority of Sikhs came to accept the reforms of Guru Gobind Singh, the creator of the Khalsa.
Among the few remaining non-Khalsa Sikhs were the Sant Nirankaris, who had their own guru.
There was considerable hostility between Khalsa and Sant Nirankari Sikhs, each of whom considered the other to be heretical.
In 1977, a holy man named Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale became head of the Damdami Taksal, an organization dedicated to upholding the Khalsa as the only authentic embodiment of Sikhism.
The following year, the Sant Nirankaris met in the Sikh holy city of Amritsar.
Seeing this as an affront, Bhindranwale’s followers attacked the meeting with swords.
Unfortunately, the Sant Nirankaris had firearms and won the resulting battle.
This increased the enmity between the Khalsa and the Sant Nirankaris.
This was followed by a wave of murders of Sant Nirankaris, almost certainly instigated by Bhindranwale, whose disciples also attacked Punjab state police, officials, and government buildings.
By 1983, ordinary Hindu Punjabis as well as Sant Nirankaris were being killed.
Hindus in Punjab and elsewhere took revenge by murdering innocent Sikhs.
Violence between Hindus and Sikhs became so common that it seemed almost inevitable.
(In the same way, in the 1990s, Hindu-Muslim violence on a scale not seen for forty years convinced many that the two largest religious communities of South Asia were natural enemies.) Bhindranwale wanted a Punjab that was inhabited exclusively by Khalsa Sikhs.
He certainly supported the autonomy demanded in the Anandpur Sahib Resolution, but many believed that his real goal was Khalistan, the “land of the Khalsa” or “Pure Land,” an independent Sikh state.
The idea of Khalistan had been discussed throughout the 1970s.
It initially found little support, but during the 1980s it attracted increasing numbers of Sikhs who became convinced that their community’s interests would be ignored as long as Punjab remained part of India.
Indira saw Bhindranwale as an instrument in the struggle to uphold her dynasty.
She both prohibited action against him and refused to make even token concessions to Longowal’s demands.
This was intended to undermine the Akali Dal, by suggesting to Sikhs that—however questionable his methods—Bhindranwale fought for their interests far more effectively than Longowal.
The prime minister also hoped to use Bhindranwale to control the Congress (I) state government in Punjab: Chronic violence would ensure that the chief minister remained dependent on the Center.
In October 1983, however, a bloody massacre of Hindus by Bhindranwale’s followers generated enough political pressure that Indira had to do something: Blaming the chief minister of Punjab for allowing the killings, she put the state under President’s Rule.
This did not stop either the slaughter of Hindus or tit-for-tat murders of Sikhs.
By December 1983, Indira realized that the situation in Punjab was spiraling out of control, and she ordered Bhindranwale’s arrest.
For Indira, this transformed the violence in Punjab into a political liability: If the Hindus who formed  four fifths of India’s population felt that a Congress (I) government could not protect them from Sikh attacks, they might give their votes to other parties, particularly the new Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party.
The prime minister decided to crush Bhindranwale.
Bhindranwale had perished.
Even Sikhs who opposed Bhindranwale and Khalistan were outraged by the desecration of the center of their religion.
Sikh anger focused on Indira, but the prime minister insisted that only a small faction of unpatriotic Sikhs opposed her.
Whether out of bravery or out of naı̈veté, she showed her faith in India’s Sikhs by using them as guards.
Sikhs around the world celebrated.
In several Indian cities, particularly Delhi, Hindus responded by massacring thousands of Sikhs, indiscriminately blaming them for the assassination.
The police stood by, and in some neighborhoods, Congress (I) leaders directed the killings.
RAJIV The Congress (I) members of parliament immediately chose Rajiv Gandhi to be party leader and prime minister.
He urged all patriotic Indians to vote for him as the only person who could protect the country against its enemies, external (the United States and Pakistan) and internal (the Sikhs).
Ironically for a grandson of the secularist Nehru, he stressed his commitment to defending Hindus and Hinduism.
Congress (I) did better than ever before or since, garnering just under half of all the votes cast, and 77 percent of the seats in the Lok Sabha.
His Seventh Five Year Plan (1985–1990) made the private sector responsible for funding economic development.
Then, Rajiv lost interest in economic reform.
It has been suggested that Nehruvian economics was finally paying off: Investment in roads, electricity, and so on had created a modern infrastructure that, although by no means complete, made growth inevitable.
Others point to the huge middle class that had come into being since the 1950s, again partly as a result of Nehru’s policies; educated, well-off professionals, businessmen, civil servants, and service employees wanted consumer goods, and had the money to buy them.
This was partly because the Green Revolution lowered the cost of food.
In the 1960s, the Mizo Tribals rebelled against the state government of Assam, which they felt had ignored them during a famine.
In 1986, however, Rajiv met the leader of  the rebels, and bought him off by making him chief minister in place of the Congress (I) incumbent.
Just as Rajiv was ending the revolt in Mizoram, he was helping to provoke one in Kashmir.
From the 1930s, the most important politician in Kashmir was Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah, who led a party called the National Conference.
The Sheikh died in 1982, when his son Farooq Abdullah succeeded him as head of the National Conference and chief minister.
Farooq ran afoul of Indira, who replaced him with one of his rivals in the National Conference.
Soon afterwards, Rajiv reinstated Farooq, and ordered elections for the Kashmir legislature for March 1987.
Knowing that their parties had become unpopular in the state, Rajiv and Farooq rigged the voting so that Congress (I) and the National Conference won 66 of the 76 legislative seats.
Such blatant electoral fraud provoked great anger, especially among educated young Kashmiri Muslims.
Many traced all their problems to the fact that Kashmir was part of India, and now called for independence or merger with Pakistan.
He started out well, meeting the Akali Dal leader Longowal and promising to compensate the families of victims of the Delhi massacres, to reinstate Sikh soldiers who had been dismissed after the attack at Amritsar, to give Chandigarh to Punjab, and to review the division of water between Punjab and Haryana.
Its victims included Longowal, who was assassinated by hard-line Sikhs soon after his accord with Rajiv.
Leadership of the Akali Dal passed to Surjit Singh Barnala, who became chief minister of Punjab when President’s Rule ended in September 1985.
The massacres had left many Sikhs unable to trust Hindus, Congress (I), or the Center.
More and more Sikhs were drawn to the idea of Khalistan.
All the while, Punjab was suffering from economic problems.
Agricultural profits declined with the end of the growth generated by the Green Revolution, and political unrest helped raise unemployment.
Discontented young men were drawn into militant groups, who called their terrorist strikes a war of independence for Khalistan.
Washington funneled its support through Pakistan, which from 1981 received heavy American economic aid and military assistance.
In 1987, he intervened in the war between the government of Sri Lanka and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam or LTTE, who wanted self-rule for the Tamil-speaking parts of Sri Lanka.
One of the members of Rajiv’s team with a reputation for honesty was Vishwanath Pratap Singh, called V.P.
In 1987, he found indications that some of the cronies had received money from Bofors, a Swedish armaments manufacturer, in return for a lucrative contract to supply the Indian army with artillery.
The prime minister’s role in the Bofors scandal is still unclear, but at the very least he shielded his friends from investigation.
A few months later, Rajiv’s cronies orchestrated his expulsion from Congress (I).
V.P. was widely seen as a new J.P. Narayan, a crusader against a corrupt Congress government.
He reestablished J.P. and Desai’s Janata  Morcha (People’s Front) and with a Lok Sabha election due in 1989 pursued alliances with other parties.
The most important of these were two offshoots of the old Janata Party, which had broken up in 1980.
One, which kept the Janata Party name, was led by Chandra Shekhar, a former member of Congress with leftist leanings.
The other was the Lok Dal, the resuscitated party of Chaudhuri Charan Singh (who had died in 1987).
At the end of 1988, V.P.’s Janata Morcha, the Janata Party, the Lok Dal, and various defectors from Congress (I) united to form the Janata Dal (People’s Party), under V.P.’s leadership.
Regional parties had proliferated since the 1970s.
Besides the National Conference in Kashmir, the Akali Dal in Punjab, and the DMK in Tamil Nadu, they included the Telugu Desam Party of Andhra Pradesh, the Asom Gana Parishad (Assam Community Council) of Assam, and the Shiv Sena (Army of Shiva or of Shivaji) of Maharashtra.
India also had a new national party in the BJP, the Bharatiya Janata Party or Indian People’s Party.
The BJP was founded in 1980 by people who had belonged to the Jan Sangh until its merger into the Janata Party in 1977.
In the interests of unity, the minority of Indians who are not Hindus must accommodate themselves to that culture.
This necessitates the abandonment of Congress’s version of “secularism,” which by giving official recognition to the special interests of non-Hindus undermines India.
The BJP was particularly concerned over what it saw as pampering of Muslims: Their Aligarh Muslim University was subsidized by the government; their state of Kashmir enjoyed special autonomy; they were exempt from the family law that applied to other Indians.
The party is associated with several likeminded groups in what is called the Sangh Parivar or Family of Organizations.
Then there are the Bajrang Dal or Strong Party, an armed force that ostensibly protects Hindus during communal disturbances; the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (Indian Laborers’ Organization), a federation of Hindu nationalist trade unions; and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP, World Council of Hindus).
Rajiv’s tenure as prime minister, however, saw an explosion of support for the BJP, especially in the urban middle class of the Hindi-speaking states of the north.
The party attracted people who disliked the corruption of Congress (I) and its fixation on the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty, and of course Hindus who felt that their interests were being overridden to placate religious minorities.
Much of the BJP’s strength was drawn from the Rama temple movement.
Rama, the hero of the Ramayana, is regarded as an earthly incarnation of Vishnu and in north India is one of the most popular Hindu deities.
He is said to have been born at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh.
In the sixteenth century, a general of the Mughal emperor Babur built a mosque at Ayodhya, called the Babri Masjid or Babur Mosque.
According to devotees of Rama, the mosque was built on the site of a demolished temple to their deity, and from at least the nineteenth century, Hindus and Muslims disputed control of the site.
After independence, the Ayodhya district administration sealed the mosque and prevented members of either community from worshipping there.
In 1986, the VHP started a campaign to tear down the Babri Masjid and build a new temple to Rama.
The drive was supported by the other organizations of the Sangh Parivar, including the BJP.
The Rama temple movement became a symbol of the dispute between Hindutva and secularism and hence of the differences between the BJP and Congress (I).
Building the temple would affirm India’s essentially Hindu character; preserving the mosque would prove that India heeded the wishes of Muslims and other minority communities, even if this meant ignoring the sensibilities of the majority.
Early in 1989, V.P. Singh’s Janata Dal, the Telugu Desam Party, the Asom Gana Parishad, and the DMK formed the National Front, an alliance to fight Congress (I) in the election at the end of the year.
The BJP and the National Front later agreed not to run candidates in the same constituency, which reduced the chance of splitting the anti-Congress (I) vote.
The election left Congress (I) the largest party in the Lok Sabha, but for the first time ever no party won a majority: Rajiv’s party was reduced to 37 percent of the seats; the Janata Dal followed with 27 percent, and the BJP got 16 percent.
Rather than see Rajiv retain power, the BJP and the Communist Party of India (Marxist) agreed to support a National Front government.
His efforts to resolve the conflict in Punjab came to nothing, as the need to keep his parliamentary allies happy forced him to renege on promises to end President’s Rule, try the ringleaders of the Delhi massacres, and reinstate Sikhs in the army.
Just as V.P. was taking over the prime minister’s office in December 1989, the simmering anger of many young Kashmiris boiled over into a violent revolt.
It passed, but during 1990 the rising in Kashmir developed into a civil war far deadlier than that in Punjab.
At the same time, fighting broke out in Assam.
After the Bangladesh War of 1971, Hindus and Muslims from Bangladesh illegally settled in Assam in such numbers that the Assamese were afraid of being overwhelmed.
The United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA), which was established in 1980, organized a civil disobedience campaign to force the Center to deport the immigrants.
In 1985, Rajiv promised to deprive illegal immigrants of the right to vote and deport those who had come from Bangladesh since 1971.
Nothing was done, however, and in 1990 the ULFA launched a war of independence in Assam, arguing that the immigrants would not leave as long as the state was part of India.
It has been suggested that V.P. should have remained a purely moral leader, as Mahatma Gandhi and J.P. Narayan had done.
The need to hold together the Janata Dal and the National Front, and retain the parliamentary support of both the BJP and the Marxists, made V.P.’s administration particularly ineffective.
When Devi Lal, the deputy prime minister and leader of the Lok Dal, was dismissed from the cabinet in August 1990, it was obvious that the days of the Janata Dal government were numbered.
Twelve years earlier, Morarji Desai’s government had appointed the Mandal Commission to study the position of the Other Backward Classes (OBCs), the Hindu communities that were neither upper castes nor Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Earlier in the year, the BJP had formed its first state governments after winning legislative elections in Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan.
Lal Krishna Advani, the leader of the party, resolved on a gesture of his own to unite Hindus behind the BJP.
Advani’s rath yatra was a motorized journey across north India, from Somnath in Gujarat to Ayodhya.
A thousand years earlier, the Muslim raider Mahmud the Ghaznawid had destroyed a great temple of Shiva at Somnath.
Now, the BJP chief was calling for Hindus to follow this example at Ayodhya, by tearing down the Babri Masjid and restoring the Rama temple.
Advani was enthusiastically welcomed by Hindus all along his route.
His stops were often followed by attacks on Muslims.
A month into the rath yatra, however, he was arrested by the Janata Dal chief minister of Bihar on the plea that he was stirring up communal violence.
Not surprisingly, the BJP refused to continue to back a Janata Dal government in New Delhi.
The president offered the job back to Rajiv Gandhi, whose Congress (I) was still the largest party in the Lok Sabha.
He preferred to wait for a new election, which he hoped would restore Congress (I)’s majority, and threw his party’s support behind Chandra Shekhar, the one-time leader of the Janata Party.
By combining his faction of the Janata Dal with Congress (I), Chandra Shekhar secured a majority in the Lok Sabha and became prime minister.
Using the excuse that the government had put him under police surveillance, he withdrew Congress (I)’s support from Chandra Shekhar.
Rajiv again campaigned on his dynasty’s name, although he abandoned the overt appeals to Hinduism that he had made in 1984 and reasserted the old Congress commitment to “secularism.” V.P. Singh aimed for the OBC vote; and Advani drummed up Hindu nationalist support with references to his rath yatra, the Babri Masjid, and communal violence.
Rajiv’s cronies turned to the only adult member of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty, the murdered man’s Italian widow Sonia Gandhi.
(Sanjay Gandhi’s widow Maneka was an active politician, but bad relations with her in-laws had taken her into the Jan- ata Dal.) Sonia declared that she was not interested in politics and declined the leadership of her husband’s party.
This provoked a power struggle within Congress (I).
It was won by Pamulaparti Venkata Narasimha Rao, a former chief minister of Andhra Pradesh and cabinet minister under Indira and Rajiv.
For the first time since 1947, barring the nineteen-month tenure of Lal Bahadur Shastri, Congress had a leader drawn from outside the dynasty.
11 India Today LIBERALIZATION In the 1991 election to the Lok Sabha, Congress (I) retained its place as India’s most popular political party, although it received fewer votes than in 1989.
The striking feature of the election was a breakthrough on the part of the Bharatiya Janata Party, which doubled its share of the vote to 20 percent and replaced the Janata Dal as the second largest party in parliament.
The rest of the seats in the lower house were divided among a much-reduced Janata Dal, and leftist and regional parties.
The party was the natural beneficiary of the continuing spread of Hindu nationalism and (in some quarters) of anti-Muslim sentiment.
Both were fueled by the Rama temple movement and communal violence, which were linked to the BJP through Advani’s rath yatra.
Upper-caste Hindus who were angry over V.P. Singh’s decision to implement the Mandal Report and unwilling to support the “secular” Congress (I), turned towards the BJP.
More broadly, many Indians who regarded the Congress (I) and Janata Dal governments as failures transferred their votes to the BJP, the only other national party.
As Congress (I) was the largest party in parliament, its leader Pamu-  laparti Venkata Narasimha Rao was installed as prime minister.
Narasimha Rao’s followers occupied only 42 percent of the seats in the Lok Sabha, but he managed to secure guarantees of support from enough small parties to cobble together a majority.
Over the next few years, Congress (I) won several by-elections to fill vacant seats, including (for reasons that will be explained) twelve of Punjab’s thirteen Lok Sabha seats.
In 1994, the prime minister acquired a parliamentary majority in his own right when a dissident faction that had broken away from the Janata Dal joined Congress (I).
When Narasimha Rao became the leader of his party, he was approaching his seventieth birthday and in poor health.
He was widely regarded as an interim chief, and without the authority of the NehruGandhi dynasty, he lacked the full support of his colleagues in Congress (I).
In some states, he called elections to local and state Congress committees for the first time since the early 1970s.
No one could deny that the new committees represented the party members, and the fact that they gave their support to Narasimha Rao strengthened the prime minister against his rivals.
In 1992, the All-India Congress Committee, chosen by the state committees, met to elect the Congress Working Committee (the party executive).
Narasimha Rao stood for election as party president, something that Rajiv had never done.
He won, confirming that he was the chosen leader of Congress (I) and making his position unassailable.
As soon as he became prime minister, Narasimha Rao began to reform India’s economic policy.
The same is true of the effects of Nehru’s planned economic development.
Many economists believe that when India became independent, planned development offered the only possible route to economic growth, but that it was kept in place for too long until it became a hindrance rather than a help.
Most public-sector undertakings were grossly inefficient: As late as 2000, after nine years of economic reforms, only 134 of India’s 240 state-owned firms made profits.
This was not merely because memories of colonial rule had faded: The nature of the modern global economy meant that if India did open its doors to foreign business, it would attract firms from so many countries that no one of them could acquire control as the British East India Company had done.
Finally, the economic collapse of the Soviet bloc had discredited the idea of a planned economy.
During the first half of 1991, India drifted into a severe economic crisis.
One of the last acts of Chandra Shekhar’s government was to raise funds by selling $200 million worth of gold.
The economy was therefore Narasimha Rao’s first priority.
He chose a well-known economist named Manmohan Singh to be his finance minister.
Manmohan Singh promptly devalued the rupee, which increased  the competitiveness of Indian exports, boosted sales, and thus brought in foreign exchange.
He and Narasimha Rao then launched the program of economic reforms, called liberalization.
One of the first things that Manmohan Singh did was to abolish licensing for all but eighteen industries.
In the long term, Narasimha Rao and Manmohan Singh hoped to bring about economic growth through increased competition, modernization, and foreign investment.
In 1994, India signed the final act of the Uruguay round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, committing itself to an open economy of a sort unimaginable only a few years earlier.
This ended the government monopolies that had been created by the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 and Indira Gandhi’s nationalizations.
Liberalization was followed by rapid economic growth, which reached its peak with a 7.5 percent annual increase in India’s gross domestic product between 1994/1995 and 1996/1997.
Supporters of economic reform say that the process is not yet finished, and that once it is, growth will be much faster.
Soon after becoming finance minister, Manmohan Singh said that several concerns would be privatized.
There have been complaints that the effects of the economic reforms will remain limited unless India’s infrastructure is improved.
PUNJAB, KASHMIR, AND AYODHYA Beside economic reforms, Narasimha Rao’s term as prime minister saw continuing secessionist and communal violence.
To head the Punjab police, the National Front government had appointed K.P.S.
Gill, a Sikh but a fierce opponent of the pro-Khalistan militants.
The Akali Dal, which was becoming increasingly friendly toward the militants, was outraged when Narasimha Rao left Gill at his job.
Most of those who did vote were supporters of Congress (I), which won all but one Lok Sabha seat, and a majority in the state legislature.
The Center had finally begun to heed Sikh grievances, and this eroded support for Khalistan.
Chandigarh has not become part of Punjab; but in 1995–1996, the courts convicted and imprisoned many people for their role in the massacres of Sikhs that took place in Delhi in 1984, and a former government minister belonging to Congress (I) was put on trial for instigating the violence.
In 1992, the state government of Assam won over the moderates of the United Liberation Front of Assam and crushed the extremists.
During the 1990s, Hindu-Muslim relations in India were worse than  at any time since the 1940s.
Part of the reason was the war in Kashmir between Muslim militants and the Indian government.
Many, perhaps most, of them were not Kashmiris, but Muslims from Pakistan and other countries.
The guerrillas massacred Hindu, Sikh, and Muslim civilians in Kashmir; dueled with Indian soldiers and police; and bombed government and military installations.
Over 30,000 civilians have died at the hands of the militants in Kashmir since the 1980s.
One of the few things that most Pakistanis agree on is that none of Kashmir should remain part of India (some want it annexed to their country, others are prepared to let Kashmiris become independent if they wish).
The Indian government in turn sees the attacks in Kashmir as terrorism, conducted by proxies of Pakistan.
Many non-Muslim Indians, however, knowing that a large number of Muslim Kashmiris support the aims (and sometimes the methods) of the guerrillas who want to take Kashmir out of India, regard the situation in Kashmir as proof of the disloyalty of Muslim citizens of India in general.
Their interpretation seems to receive further credence from the fact that a few Muslim groups in other parts of India have declared their support for the militants in Kashmir.
This has contributed to increased suspicion and hostility toward Indian Muslims on the part of non-Muslims.
Muslims have responded in kind.
At the beginning of the 1990s, the great symbol of Hindu-Muslim conflict was the Babri Masjid at Ayodhya.
In Uttar Pradesh, the state where Ayodhya lies, a legislative election was held at the same time as the Lok Sabha polls that brought Narasimha Rao to power.
It was won by the BJP, whose leader Kalyan Singh became chief minister.
The new administration transferred the land surrounding the Babri Masjid to the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, the organization that had started the temple movement.
Then, volunteers from the Parishad and its ally the Bajrang Dal cleared all the buildings around the mosque.
The central government sent security forces to protect the Babri Masjid, but Kalyan Singh’s government barred them from the area, and on December 6, 1992, the volunteers demolished the mosque.
Because the Babri Masjid had become such a powerful symbol for many Hindus and Muslims, this immediately raised communal tensions all over India.
Narasimha Rao responded with a combination of repression and concessions.
He dismissed India’s four BJP state governments (in Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan) and temporarily banned militant Hindu and Muslim organizations, including the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, the Bajrang Dal, and the RSS.
Two days after the demolition, the prime minister ordered the arrest of Lal Krishna Advani and other BJP leaders (they were freed the next month).
Finally, the Center set up a trust to rebuild the Babri Masjid and to build a Rama temple beside it, although neither project has yet been started.
Since the destruction of the Babri Masjid, India has seen periodic recrudescences of communal violence.
The latest began in February 2002, following a mob attack on a trainload of Vishwa Hindu Parishad volunteers from Gujarat who had demonstrated in support of the construction of a Rama temple at Ayodhya.
CASTE POLITICS In September 1991, Narasimha Rao confirmed that V.P. Singh’s promise to implement the Mandal Report would go ahead.
To meet complaints that this was unfair to groups that were upper caste but disadvantaged, another 10 percent of jobs were promised to economically backward communities of any caste.
Ruling parties might recognize communities that supported them as OBCs, even if there was no real social or economic justification for calling them “backward.” The situation might verge on the ridiculous: In 1994, Tamil Nadu reserved 69 percent of state posts to SCs and what it defined as OBCs, and Karnataka 73 percent.
In support of this, it is sometimes pointed out that every prime minister who has held office for at least two years has been a  Brahmin (Nehru, Indira, Desai, Rajiv, Narasimha Rao, and the current incumbent Vajpayee), even though their community forms only one twentieth of India’s population.
The local Congress organizations in both states were founded by Brahmins, including the Nehrus of Uttar Pradesh.
After independence, these “forward castes” ensured that their OBC and SC dependents supported Congress as well.
During the 1960s, rising political awareness took the OBCs into other parties, first the various incarnations of the Lok Dal, and then V.P. Singh’s Janata Dal.
Except in the 1977 election, however, the SCs of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar continued to support Congress, which was thus able to retain control of both states.
Then, in 1989, many SCs transferred their votes to Janata Dal.
During the 1990s, the Janata Dal fragmented.
In Bihar, both OBCs and SCs gave their backing to the Rashtriya Janata Dal (National People’s Party), which has been able to keep both Congress (I) and the BJP out of power.
The Rama temple movement helped take most members of Uttar Pradesh’s upper castes, and some OBCs and SCs, into the BJP.
Another manifestation of the politicization of caste has been an increase in caste violence since the 1990s.
THE UNITED FRONT There were frequent accusations of corruption against Narasimha Rao’s government.
The ringleader of the scheme claimed to have given bribes to Narasimha Rao, but the prime minister denied the charge.
Two years later, Arjun Singh, Narasimha Rao’s main rival in Congress (I), resigned from the cabinet, alleging that several of his colleagues were blatantly corrupt.
Then, allegations emerged that in 1993 Narasimha Rao had bribed four members of the Lok Sabha from a small party to vote with his government so that he could keep his parliamentary majority.
The rising distrust of Congress (I) was one reason that the party won only three of the nine state legislative elections held in 1994 and 1995.
When polling took place, Congress (I)’s share of the vote fell sharply, from 42 percent in 1991 to 30 percent; the BJP’s rose from 20 to 24 percent; and support for the Janata Dal continued its freefall.
Because the BJP’s support was more evenly spread across the country, the Hindu nationalist party won more seats in the Lok Sabha than Congress (I).
For only the second time in the history of independent India, Congress was not the largest party in parliament.
All were modeled on V.P. Singh’s National Front (the Janata Dal and its allies): The member parties agreed not to run candidates against each other, and to form a coalition government if they obtained a majority in Lok Sabha.
Besides the National Front, the Lok Sabha contained the BJP and Congress (I) blocs, and the Left Front, which was dominated by the Communist Party of India (Marxist).
In 1993, Atal Bihari Vajpayee had replaced Lal Krishna Advani as the political head of the BJP.
Many said that the party had picked Vajpayee, who had been minister of external affairs under Morarji Desai, because he seemed less of an extremist than Advani.
He became the country’s first leader since 1947 who had never belonged to Congress (where Morarji Desai, Chaudhuri Charan Singh, V.P. Singh, and Chandra Shekhar had all spent part of their political careers).
The National Front, the Left Front, and several unaffiliated small parties hastily joined together in a United Front.
Congress (I) agreed to support a United Front  government, assuring it a majority in the Lok Sabha.
After some infighting, the Janata Dal chief minister of Karnataka, Haradanahalli Doddegowda Deve Gowda, was selected as prime minister.
The United Front spelled out its policy in a Common Minimum Program.
To keep the support of Congress (I), the new government undertook to maintain “secularism” and to continue the economic reforms.
As a sop to the regional parties of the National Front, it promised to increase the autonomy of the states.
It met the wishes of peasant parties and the Left Front with a commitment to increase government assistance to farmers and workers.
The main reason was that if he wanted to retain his majority, Deve Gowda could not alienate either Congress (I) or any of the members of the United Front.
(Although the Mandal Report guaranteed OBCs government jobs, it did not touch the legislatures.) Like Chandra Shekhar’s administration in 1990–1991, the United Front government could only last as long as it had the approval of Congress (I), which after just ten months turned against Deve Gowda.
Allegedly because of his failure to consult it regarding his policies, Congress (I) withdrew support from the prime minister, though not the rest of the government.
Deve Gowda was replaced with his minister of external affairs, Inder Kumar Gujral.
Then, in late 1997, the report of the official inquiry into the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi was released.
The DMK was now a member of the United Front, and Congress (I) demanded its expulsion from the ruling coalition.
Gujral refused to dump his ally, lost Congress (I)’s support, and resigned.
ATAL BIHARI VAJPAYEE In the election, the Janata Dal was almost wiped out.
The BJP rose to a third of the seats in the Lok Sabha, and Congress (I) held steady at just over a fourth.
It looked as if there might be a replay of the events of 1996, but there was an important difference: The destruction of the Janata Dal had so weakened the United Front that it was unlikely to be able to form a government.
Several United Front parties deserted their sinking ship and joined the BJP bloc in return for places in the government.
The BJP and its allies called themselves the National Democratic Alliance.
The new government comprised eighteen parties, five more than the United Front.
This view was shared by most Indian political parties; Narasimha Rao and Gujral both refused to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and in 1996 India voted against the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in the General Assembly of the United Nations.
As under the United Front, political calculation stalled plans to reserve seats for women.
The first two are inhabited largely by Tribals.
Most of the people of Uttaranchal are considered high caste (60 percent of them are Rajputs, who in the rest of India are a small elite community).
In Uttar Pradesh as a whole, however, OBCs and SCs formed half the population, and the Uttaranchalis—often as disadvantaged as low-caste Hindus elsewhere—demanded their own state to end “reverse discrimination” at the hands of the OBCs and SCs who dominated the Uttar Pradesh government in the 1990s.
With the exception of Narasimha Rao in 1994–1996, the prime ministers since 1989 have lacked majorities in the Lok Sabha (with his bloc allies, Vajpayee has a majority, but on its own the BJP does not).
Moreover, the governments since 1996 have been coalitions, presided over by cabinets that include representatives of not only the main party but also its allies.
They either call for a presidential system such as they believe exists in the United States (they are unaware that a hostile Congress can curtail the authority of the president of the United States) or look back nostalgically to the strong prime ministership of Indira Gandhi.
The United Front and National Democratic Alliance governments have both included regional parties, so Deve Gowda, Gujral, and Vajpayee have been sensitive to state concerns.
INTO THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY Narasimha Rao had resigned as head of Congress (I) a few months after losing the prime ministership in 1996.
He was replaced with Sitaram Kesri, who during the 1998 election campaign was overshadowed by Rajiv Gandhi’s Italian-born widow Sonia.
Some credited Sonia with saving Congress (I) from oblivion by appealing to voters who believed in the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty.
Sonia became persuaded that if the Tamil regional party the AIADMK pulled out of the National Democratic Alliance and joined the Congress (I) bloc, she would have a majority in the Lok Sabha.
His visit was very successful, and later the same year Vajpayee made a return visit to Washington, during which the United States agreed to resume the economic assistance that had been stopped in 1998.
According to Inder Kumar Gujral, this meant that it could afford to make concessions to its neighbors, without demanding anything in return.
One of the fruits of this was an agreement that ended a long-standing dispute with Bangladesh over the use of the waters of the Ganges.
In May 1999, however, India learned that armed bands had crossed the line between the Pakistani and Indian sectors of Kashmir and established control over territory on the Indian side.
So did Sonia’s Italian birth, which the National Democratic Alliance made a campaign issue.
Some hard-core Hindu nationalist support may have drifted away from the BJP because of Vajpayee’s sidelining of Hindutva issues, but the weaknesses of Congress (I) were far more serious.
The longer Congress (I) is out of power at the Center, the longer it will be unable to dispense patronage.
All this reduced support for Congress (I), as did Sonia’s undynamic leadership.
In the end, the National Democratic Alliance took 54 percent of the Lok Sabha’s 545 seats.
The Congress (I) bloc fell to just 24 percent.
The American military response to the attacks has led many Indians to demand that their country wage its own “war on terrorism” against the Pakistani supporters of militancy in Kashmir.
The situation is complicated by the fact that since September 11, Washington has pursued close ties with both India and Pakistan.
