There is no mindbody problem for tomatoes.
Guinea Pig When I was fifteen, I had a summer job punching buttons on a Friden mechanical calculator in a physiology lab at Stanford University.
Several years passed this way, almost as if I had never had any epiphany, but then one day, when I was a beginning assistant professor at Indiana University, I met a highly thoughtful woman who had adopted the same vegetarian philosophy as I once had, and had done so for similar reasons, but she had stuck to it for a longer time than I had.
Though it was anything but crystal-clear to me, I was willing to accept the vague idea that some souls, provided they were small enough, could legitimately be sacrificed for the sake of the desires of larger souls, such as mine and those of other human beings.
I remember, albeit dimly, my own genuine childhood confusion at this mystery, but since meat-eating was such a bland commonplace, I usually swept it under the rug and didnt give it much thought.
It seemed to me that nobody else was facing the intense questions of life, death, and porcinal identity that this silent, still head provoked so powerfully and agitatedly inside mine.
Quite rightly, he is saying that the piece is majestic and noble, but more controversially, he is drawing a dividing line between different levels or sizes of human souls, suggesting that some people are simply not up to playing this piece, not because of any physical limitations of their bodies, but because their souls are not large enough.
And yet I have to admit that I somewhat agree with Huneker, and I cant help wondering if we dont all of us implicitly believe in the validity of something vaguely like the idea of small-souled and large-souled human beings.
Small-souled and Large-souled Humans Some of us believe in capital punishment  the intentional public squelching of a human soul, no matter how ardently that soul would plead for mercy, would tremble, would shake, would shriek, would desperately struggle to escape, on being led down the corridor to the site of their doom.
Some of us (myself included) believe that the late President Reagan was essentially all gone many years before his body gave up the ghost, and more generally we believe that people in the final stages of Alzheimers disease are essentially all gone.
All human beings  at least all sufficiently large-souled ones  have to make up their minds about such matters as the swatting of mosquitoes or flies, the setting of mousetraps, the eating of rabbits or lobsters or turkeys or pigs, perhaps even of dogs or horses, the purchase of mink stoles or ivory statues, the usage of leather suitcases or crocodile belts, even the penicillinbased attack on swarms of bacteria that have invaded their body, and on and on.
The world imposes large and small moral dilemmas on us all the time  at the very least, meal after meal  and we are all forced to take a stand.
It is most unlikely that you, a reader of this book, have missed all the Star Wars movies, with their rather unforgettable characters C-3PO and R2-D2.
In one of the Star Wars films, I recall seeing a huge squadron of hundreds of uniformly marching robots  and when I say uniformly, I mean really uniformly, with all of them strutting in perfect synchrony, and all of them featuring identical, impassive, vacuous, mechanical facial expressions.
These metallic marchers are mere soldier robots, members of a dronelike caste in some larger robot colony, and are merely following out, in their zombie-ish way, the inflexible mechanical drives implanted in their circuitry.
Instead, Id like to suggest that we both have considerably higher readings than that on the hunekometer!
What has happened, however, is that a dynamic, snowballing entity has come into existence that over a period of years will be capable of developing a complex set of internal structures or patterns  and the presence, to a higher and higher degree, of those intricate patterns is what would endow that entity (or rather, the enormously more complex entities into which it slowly metamorphoses, step by step) with an ever-larger value along the Huneker soul-scale, homing in on a value somewhere in the vicinity of 100.
I would also argue that most peoples largely unconscious prejudices about whether to eat or not to eat this or that food, whether to buy or not to buy this or that article of clothing, whether to swat or not to swat this or that insect, whether to root or not to root for this or that species of robot in a sci-fi film, whether to be sad or not to be sad if a human character in a film or a novel meets with a violent end, whether to claim or not to claim that a particular senescent person is no longer there, and so forth, reflect precisely this kind of numerical continuum in their minds, whether they admit it or not.
You might wonder whether my having drawn a cone that impenitently depicts degrees of souledness during the development of a given human being implies that I would be more willing, if placed under enormous pressure (as in the film Sophies Choice), to extinguish the life of a two-year-old child than the life of a twenty-year-old adult.
The answer is, No, it does not. Even though I sincerely believe there is much more of a soul in the twenty-year-old than in the two-year-old (a view that will no doubt dismay many readers), I nonetheless have enormous respect for the potential of the two-year-old to develop a much larger soul over the course of a dozen or so years.
In addition, I have been built, by the mechanisms of billions of years of evolution, to perceive in the two-year-old what, for lack of a better word, I will call cuteness, and the perceived presence of that quality grants the two-year-old an amazingly strong shell of protectedness against attacks not just by me, but by humans of all ages, sexes, and persuasions.
Post Scriptum The first draft of this chapter was written two years ago, and although it discussed meat-eating and vegetarianism, it had far less on the topic than this final version does.
By definition, I think about the brain, since the human brain is precisely the machinery that carries out human thinking. This amusing contradiction has forced me to ask myself, What do I mean, and what do other people mean, by brain research?, and this leads naturally to the question, What are the structures in the brain that someone could in principle study? Most neuroscientists, if they were asked such a question, would make a list that would include (at least some of) the following items (listed roughly in order of physical size): amino acids neurotransmitters DNA and RNA synapses dendrites neurons Hebbian neural assemblies columns in the visual cortex area 19 of the visual cortex the entire visual cortex the left hemisphere Although these are all legitimate and important objects of neurological study, to me this list betrays a limited point of view.
Accordingly, I herewith propose a list of abstractions that researchers of the brain should be just as concerned with: the concept dog the associative link between the concepts dog and bark object files (as proposed by Anne Treisman) frames (as proposed by Marvin Minsky) memory organization packets (as proposed by Roger Schank) long-term memory and short-term memory episodic memory and melodic memory analogical bridges (as proposed by my own research group) mental spaces (as proposed by Gilles Fauconnier) memes (as proposed by Richard Dawkins) the ego, id, and superego (as proposed by Sigmund Freud) the grammar of ones native language sense of humor I I could extend this list arbitrarily.
The big picture will become clear only when we focus on the brains large-scale architecture, rather than doing ever more fine-grained analyses of its building blocks.
For this reason, heart surgeons dont think about the details of heart cells but concentrate instead on large architectural structures in the heart, just as car buyers dont think about the physics of protons and neutrons or the chemistry of alloys, but concentrate instead on high abstractions such as comfort, safety, fuel efficiency, maneuverability, sexiness, and so forth.
For instance, consider the case of John Searle, a philosopher who has spent much of his career heaping scorn on artificial-intelligence research and computational models of thinking, taking special delight in mocking Turing machines.
A momentary digression Turing machines are extremely simple idealized computers whose memory consists of an infinitely long ( i.e., arbitrarily extensible) tape of so-called cells, each of which is just a square that either is blank or has a dot inside it.
Though the basic operations of all Turing machines are supremely trivial, any computation of any sort can be carried out by an appropriate Turing machine (numbers being represented by adjacent dot-filled cells, so that  flanked by blanks would represent the integer 3).
In a ploy that, in my opinion, should fool only third-graders but that unfortunately takes in great multitudes of his professional colleagues, he pokes merciless fun at the idea that thinking could ever be implemented in a system made of such far-fetched physical substrates as toilet paper and pebbles (the tape would be an infinite roll of toilet paper, and a pebble on a square of paper would act as the dot in a cell), or Tinkertoys, or a vast assemblage of beer cans and ping-pong balls bashing together.
To make a long story short, if one keeps climbing upward in the chain of command within the brain, one finds at the very top those over-all organizational forces and dynamic properties of the large patterns of cerebral excitation that are correlated with mental states or psychic activity.
Yes, reader, I ask you: Who shoves whom around in the tangled megaganglion that is your brain, and who shoves whom around in this teetering bulb of dread and dream that is mine?
Was there truly something referable-to as I that was shoving around various physical brain structures, resulting in the sending of certain carefully coordinated messages through nerve fibers and the consequent moving of shoulder, elbow, wrist, and fingers in a certain complex pattern that left the book upright in its original spot  or, contrariwise, were there merely myriads of microscopic physical processes (quantummechanical collisions involving electrons, photons, gluons, quarks, and so forth) taking place in that localized region of the spatiotemporal continuum that poet Edson dubbed a teetering bulb?
To describe a gass behavior by writing a gigantic piece of text having Avogadros number of equations in it (assuming such a herculean feat were possible) would not lead to anyones understanding of anything.
All of this, to be sure, is very old hat to all physicists and to most philosophers as well, and can be summarized by the unoriginal maxim Thermodynamics is explained by statistical mechanics, but perhaps the idea becomes somewhat clearer when it is turned around, as follows: Statistical mechanics can be bypassed by talking at the level of thermodynamics.
Ferdinand Magellan circumnavigated the globe, William Shakespeare wrote some plays, J. S. Bach composed some cantatas, and Joan of Arc got herself burned at the stake, all for their own good (or bad) reasons, none of which, from their point of view, had the least thing to do with DNA, RNA, and proteins, or with carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, or with photons, electrons, protons, and neutrons, let alone with quarks, gluons, W and Z bosons, gravitons, and Higgs particles.
Thinkodynamics and Statistical Mentalics It thus comes as no news to anyone that different levels of description have different kinds of utility, depending on the purpose and the context, and I have accordingly summarized my view of this simple truth as it applies to the world of thinking and the brain: Thinkodynamics is explained by statistical mentalics, as well as its flipped-around version: Statistical mentalics can be bypassed by talking at the level of thinkodynamics.
What do I mean by these two terms, thinkodynamics and statistical mentalics?
Thinkodynamics is analogous to thermodynamics; it involves large-scale structures and patterns in the brain, and makes no reference to microscopic events such as neural firings.
By contrast, by mentalics I mean the small-scale phenomena that neurologists traditionally study: how neurotransmitters cross synapses, how cells are wired together, how cell assemblies reverberate in synchrony, and so forth.
And by statistical mentalics, I mean the averagedout, collective behavior of these very small entities  in other words, the behavior of a huge swarm as a whole, as opposed to a tiny buzz inside it.
CHAPTER 3 The Causal Potency of Patterns The Prime Mover AS THE rest of this book depends on having a clear sense for the interrelationships between different levels of description of entities that think, I would like to introduce here a few concrete metaphors that have helped me a great deal in developing my intuitions on this elusive subject.
(John Searle, so fond of unusual substrates for computation, should like this domino chainium thought experiment!)
Suppose an observer is standing by when the domino chainium is given 641 as input.
The domain of prime numbers is as remote from the physics of toppling dominos as is the physics of quarks and gluons from the Cold Wars domino theory of how communism would inevitably topple country after neighboring country in Southeast Asia.
In particular, in the domino chainium, there could be a stretch called the prime stretch whose dominos all topple when the set of potential divisors has been exhausted, which means that the input has been determined to be prime.
In a word, 641 is the prime mover.
So I ask: Who shoves whom around inside the domino chainium?
And then I remembered my domino chainium and the silly superlocal answer, That domino didnt fall because its neighbor didnt fall, you dummy! This myopic answer and my fleeting thought of honking at the car just ahead of me seemed to be cut from the same cloth.
But if you have a larger field of view and can see hordes of immobilized cars on all sides, then honking at your immediate predecessor is an absurdity, for its obvious that the problem is not local.
Or it may be something else, but its surely some social or natural event of the type that induces large numbers of people all to do the same thing as one another.
As long as we avoid simplistic notions such as a privileged grand-music neuron, we can use the domino-chainium metaphor to think about brains, and especially to remind ourselves of how, for a given phenomenon in a brain, there can be vastly different explanations belonging to vastly different domains of discourse at vastly different levels of abstraction.
For instance, let us try to answer the question, Can the primality of 641 really play a causal role in a physical system? Although 641s primality is obviously not a physical force, the answer nonetheless has to be, Yes, it does play a causal role, because the most efficient and most insight-affording explanation of the chainiums behavior depends crucially on that notion. Deep understanding of causality sometimes requires the understanding of very large patterns and their abstract relationships and interactions, not just the understanding of microscopic objects interacting in microscopic time intervals.
In short, considering 641s primality as a physical cause in our domino chainium is analogous to considering a gass temperature as a physical cause (e.g., of the amount of pressure it exerts against the walls of its container).
Thus combustion engines can be built.
Nobody who designs combustion engines worries about the fine-grained level  that of molecules.
Every turn is a risk  slight for some, large for others.
A simmball consists of a very large number of simms (a thousand, a million, I dont care), and on its periphery it frequently loses a few simms while gaining others.
Of course this image is far-fetched, but remember that the careenium is merely intended as a useful metaphor for understanding our brains, and the fact is that our brains, too, are rather far-fetched, in the sense that they too contain tiny events (neuron firings) and larger events (patterns of neuron firings), and the latter presumably somehow have representational qualities, allowing us to register and also to remember things that happen outside of our crania.
Taking the Reductionistic View of the Careenium The first inclination of a modern physicist who heard this story might be reductionistic, in the sense of pooh-poohing the large simmballs as mere epiphenomena, meaning that although they are undeniably there, they are not essential to an understanding of the system, since they are composed of simms.
The bottom line, at least for our physicist, is that epiphenomena are just convenient shorthands that summarize a large number of deeper, lowerlevel phenomena; they are never essential to any explanation.
After all, we ourselves are pretty big epiphenomena, and as Ive already observed many times in this book, this fact dooms us to talking about the world in terms of other epiphenomena at about our size level (e.g., our mothers and fathers, our cats and cars and cakes, our sailboats and saxophones and sassafras trees).
In my minds eye, I often see the simms as acting like the silver marbles in a pinball machine, with the simmballs acting like the pins  that is, the larger stationary cylindrical objects which the marbles strike and ricochet off of as they roll down the sloped board of play.
First, we shift to time-lapse photography, meaning that imperceptibly slow motions get speeded up so as to become perceptible, while fast motions become so fast that they are not even seen as blurs  they become imperceptible, like the spinning blades of an electric fan.
Instead of seeing simms bashing into what look like large stationary blobs, we realize that these blobs are not stationary at all but have a lively life of their own, moving back and forth across the table and interacting with each other, as if there were nothing else on the table but them.
In fact, if colloidal particles are added to a glass of water, then it becomes a locus of Brownian motion, which is an incessant random jiggling of the colloidal particles, due to a myriad of imperceptible collisions with the water molecules, which are far tinier.
(The colloidal particles here play the role of simmballs, and the water molecules play the role of simms.)
Or, to echo the key question posed by Roger Sperry, Who shoves whom around in the population of causal forces that occupy the careenium?
The Dance of the Simmballs From our higher-level macroscopic vantage point as we hover above the table, we can see ideas giving rise to other ideas, we can see one symbolic event reminding the system of another symbolic event, we can see elaborate patterns of simmballs coming together and forming even larger patterns that constitute analogies  in short, we can visually eavesdrop on the logic of a thinking mind taking place in the patterned dance of the simmballs.
Among the earliest of such systems was James Watts steam-engine governor; subsequent ones, which are numberless, include the float-ball mechanism governing the refilling of a flush toilet, the technology inside a heat-seeking missile, and the thermostat.
On a more familiar level, there are plants  consider a sunflower or a growing vine  which, when observed at normal speed, seem as immobile as rocks and thus patently devoid of goals, but when observed in time-lapse photography, seem all of a sudden to be highly aware of their surroundings and to possess clear goals as well as strategies to reach them.
Feedback and Its Bad Rap The first time my parents wanted to buy a video camera, sometime in the 1970s, I went to the store with them and we asked to see what they had.
We were escorted to an area of the store that had several TV screens on a shelf, and a video camera was plugged into the back of one of them, thus allowing us to see what the camera was looking at and to gauge its color accuracy and such things.
I took the camera and pointed it at my father, and we saw his amused smile jump right up onto the screen.
Next I pointed the camera at my own face and presto, there was I, up on the screen, replacing my father.
But then, inevitably, I felt compelled to try pointing the camera at the TV screen itself.
Dont do that  youll break the camera! And how did I react to his sudden panic?
Later, though, as we were driving home with our brand-new video camera, I reflected carefully on the matter, and I just couldnt see where in the world there would have been any danger to the system  either to the camera or to the TV  if I had closed the loop (though a priori either one of them would seem vulnerable to a meltdown).
And so when we got home, I gingerly tried pointing the camera at the screen and, mirabile dictu, nothing terrible happened at all.
The danger I suppose one could fear is something analogous to audio feedback: perhaps one particular spot on the screen (the spot the camera is pointing straight at, of course) would grow brighter and brighter and brighter, and soon the screen would melt down right there.
As in audio feedback, it would have to come from some kind of amplification of the lights intensity; however, we know that video cameras are not designed to amplify an image in any way, but simply to transmit it to a different place.
We all know that some tribes are fearful of mirrors, many societies are suspicious of cameras, certain religions prohibit making drawings of people, and so forth.
And then, to my delight, I saw that this book discussed paradoxical self-referential sentences like I am lying and more complicated cousins.
Such grazing of paradoxicality enchanted and fascinated me.
Years later, when I took my children to Holland and we visited the park called Madurodam (those quote marks, by the way, are a testimony to the lifelong effect on me of Nagel and Newmans insistence on the importance of distinguishing between use and mention), which contains dozens of beautifully constructed miniature replicas of famous buildings from all over Holland, I was most disappointed to see that there was no miniature replica of Madurodam itself, containing, of course, a yet tinier replica, and so on I was particularly surprised that this lacuna existed in Holland, of all places  not only the native land of M. C. Escher, but also the home of Drostes famous hot chocolate, whose box, much like the Mortons Salt box, implicated itself in an infinite regress, something that all Dutch people grow up knowing very well.
When I was but a tyke, around four or five years old, I figured out, or was told, that two twos made four.
This catchy phrase  two twos  sent thrills up and down my spine, because I realized that it involved applying the notion of two to itself.
So I pushed my luck and invented the more threeful phrase three three threes  but unfortunately, I didnt know what I meant by it.
Some years earlier, Russell had been struggling to ground mathematics in the theory of sets, which he was convinced constituted the deepest bedrock of human thought, but just when he thought he was within sight of his goal, he unexpectedly discovered a terrible loophole in set theory.
Intellectuals Who Dread Feedback Loops Many years thereafter, when I was writing a monthly column called Metamagical Themas for Scientific American magazine, I devoted a couple of my pieces to the topic of self-reference in language, and in them I featured a cornucopia of sentences invented by myself, a few friends, and quite a few readers, including some remarkable and provocative flights of fancy, such as these: If the meanings of true and false were switched, this sentence wouldnt be false.
A classical example is a paradox, such as This sentence is false, which appears to be true if false and false if true.
A sentence must be in existence before a speaker can say, This sentence is false, and the response itself will not serve, since it did not exist until it was emitted.
I suspect that such peoples allergy stems, in the final analysis, from a deep-seated fear of paradox or of the universe exploding (metaphorically), something like the panic that the television sales clerk evinced when I threatened to point the video camera at the TV screen.
CHAPTER 5 On Video Feedback Two Video Voyages, Three Decades Apart THE loop of video feedback is rich, as I found out in my first explorations with our familys new video camera in the mid-1970s.
I made an appointment at the Stanford University television studios, and upon arriving I found that the very friendly fellow there had already set up a TV and a camera on a tripod for me to play around with.
It was a piece of cake to point the camera at the screen, zoom in and out, tilt the camera, change angles, regulate brightness and contrast, and so on.
Like any curious tourist, I snapped dozens of photos (just black-and-white stills) during my exotic trip, and later I selected twelve of my favorites to use in one of GEBs dialogues.
So the story below involves a different television, a different TV camera, and in general an older technology than was used in making this books color insert.
If I pointed the camera at the metal strip instead of the center of the screen, this gave me what looked like a snapshot of the right wall of a long corridor, showing a few evenly spaced doorways (which actually were images of that metal strip), moving away from where I was standing.
If I slowly panned the camera leftwards, thus towards the center of the screen and perforce further down the apparent corridor, more and more doorways would come into view along the right wall, smaller and smaller and farther and farther away  and all of a sudden, at a critical moment, there was a wonderful, dizzying sense of infinity as I would find myself peering all the way down the corridor toward a gaping emptiness, stretching arbitrarily far away toward a single point of convergence (the vanishing point, as it is called in the theory of perspective).
My next set of experiments involved tilting the camera.
An unanticipated surprise, however, was that at certain angles of camera twist, instead of peering down a helical corridor punctuated by doorways, I seemed to be looking at a flat spiral resembling a galaxy as seen through a telescope.
Enigmatic, Emergent Reverberation At some point during the session, I accidentally stuck my hand momentarily in front of the cameras lens.
And the original motion that had set things going  the prime mover  had been my hands motion, of which this video reverberation now constituted a stable, self-sustaining visible memory trace!
This situation reminds me of another loopy phenomenon that I call reverberant barking, which one sometimes can hear in a neighborhood where many dogs live.
If dogs were a bit more like robots and didnt eventually grow tired of doing the same thing over and over again, their reverberant barking could become a stable, self-sustaining audible memory trace of the joggers fleeting passage through their street.
I picked up various objects around the room and dangled them in front of the camera without any idea of what would happen when the image was cycled round and round the video loop.
Of course each such interloping object opened up a whole new universe of possibilities, since we could vary its position as well as all the other standard variables (the amount of zoom, the angle of tilt, the direction of the camera, the brightness, the contrast, and others).
The key question is this: If you, playing the role of microphone and loudspeaker (or camera and TV), do this over and over again, will the z values you get grow unboundedly, sailing off into the wild blue (or wild yellow or wild red) yonder, or will they instead home in on a finite value?
Of course, in principle, everything could be explained in terms of them, in a rigorous and incomprehensibly verbose fashion (like explaining a gass temperature and pressure by writing out Avogadros number of equations)  but such a boringly reductionistic, nearly pixel-by-pixel explanation would entirely leave out the wonderful higher-level visual phenomena to which a human eye and mind intuitively resonate.
It is no more surprising than the fact that audio feedback can take place or that a TV camera can be pointed at a screen to which its image is being sent.
By analogy, we can think of a TV camera rigidly bolted on top of a TV set and facing away from the screen, like a flashlight tightly attached to a miners helmet, always pointing away from the miners eyes, never into them.
No matter how you turn it, the camera and the TV set turn in synchrony, preventing the closing of a loop.
We next imagine a more evolved, hence more flexible, setup; this time the camera, rather than being bolted onto its TV set, is attached to it by a short leash.
Here, depending on the length and flexibility of the cord, it may be possible for the camera to twist around sufficiently to capture at least part of the TV screen in its viewfinder, giving rise to a truncated corridor.
The next stage, obviously, is where the leash is sufficiently long and flexible that the video camera can point straight at the center of the screen.
Can the camera tilt or not, and if so, by how much?
Is there some way for the video camera itself to appear on the screen?
Perception takes as its starting point some kind of input (possibly but not necessarily a two-dimensional image) composed of a vast number of tiny signals, but then it goes much further, eventually winding up in the selective triggering of a small subset of a large repertoire of dormant symbols  discrete structures that have representational quality.
Is a heat-seeking missile aware, be it ever so minimally, of the heat emanating from the airplane that it is pursuing?
Aboard any such vehicle are one or more television cameras (and laser rangefinders and other kinds of sensors) equipped with extra processors that allow the vehicle to make sense of its environment.
The television cameras and the rangefinders (etc.)
If you doubt dogs have this, then what about chimpanzees?
Creatures at the sophistication level of dogs, thanks to the inevitable flipping-around of their perceptual apparatus and their modest but nontrivial repertoire of categories, cannot help developing an approximate sense of themselves as physical entities in a larger world.
Concepts in the brains of humans acquired the property that they could get rolled together with other concepts into larger packets, and any such larger packet could then become a new concept in its own right.
As children and teenagers, we see directly, or we see on television, or we read about, or we are told about many things that supposedly exist, things that vie intensely with each other for our attention and for acceptance by our reality evaluators  for instance, God, Godzilla, Godiva, Godot, Gdel, gods, goddesses, ghosts, ghouls, goblins, gremlins, golems, golliwogs, griffins, gryphons, gluons, and grinches.
Another way of thinking about how real X is to you is how much you would trust a newspaper article that took for granted the existence of X (for example, a living dinosaur, a sighting of Hitler, insects discovered on Mars, a perpetual-motion machine, UFO abductions, Gods omniscience, out-ofbody experiences, alternate universes, superstrings, quarks, Bigfoot, Big Brother, the Big Bang, Atlantis, the gold in Fort Knox, the South Pole, cold fusion, Einsteins tongue, Holden Caulfields brain, Bill Gates checkbook, or the proverbial twenty-mile wall for marathon runners).
It comes secondly from the reliability of our thinking mechanisms to tell us about more abstract entities that we cannot directly perceive (e.g., the role of Napoleon in French history, the impact of Wagner on lateromantic French composers, or the unsolvability by radicals, such as variste Galois, of the quintic equation).
Our hangnails are incredibly real to us (by coincidence, I found myself idly picking at a hangnail while I was reworking this paragraph), whereas to most of us, the English village of Nether Wallop and the high Himalayan country of Bhutan, not to mention the slowly swirling spiral galaxy in Andromeda, are considerably less real, even though our intellectual selves might wish to insist that since the latter are much bigger and longer-lasting than our hangnails, they ought therefore to be far realer to us than our hangnails are.
In other words, an epiphenomenon could be said to be a large-scale illusion created by the collusion of many small and indisputably non-illusory events.
It is this I that is the prime mover, the mysterious entity that lies behind, and that launches, all the creatures behaviors.
At the heart of my discussion of the tiny zipping simms and the far larger, more sluggish simmballs in the careenium was the fact that this system can be seen on two very distant levels, yielding widely discrepant interpretations.
Contrariwise, from the lower-level statistical mentalics viewpoint, there are just simms and simms alone, interacting through the fundamental dynamics of careening, bashing simms  and from this viewpoint, there is never the least vagueness or doubt about causality, because everything is governed by sharp, precise, hard-edged mathematical laws.
The Gods-eye point of view is simply not available to all observers; indeed, the very fact that such a point of view might exist is utterly unsuspected by some careenium observers.
There I am with a big grin (Ill call myself A), front and center in Anterselva di Mezzo, sitting on the lap of a young woman (B), also grinning, with B sitting on Cs lap, C on Ds lap, and so forth, until one complete lap has been made, with person K sitting on my lap.
To be sure, if one points the TV camera straight at the screen (or brings the microphone right up to the loudspeaker) one gets that strange feeling of playing with fire, not only by violating a natural-seeming hierarchy but also by seeming to create a true infinite regress  but when one thinks about it, one realizes that there was no ironclad hierarchy to begin with, and the suggested infinity is never reached; then the bubble just pops.
In general, one would think that the larger the number, the longer any description of it would have to be, but it all depends on how easily the number is expressible in terms of landmark integers  those rare integers that have exceptionally short names or descriptions, such as ten to the trillion, with its extremely economic five-syllable description.
Most large numbers, of course, are neither landmarks nor anywhere near one.
Such a description might even involve references to landmark numbers much larger than 777,777 itself!
Since it always takes such a large number of syllables to describe it, we know that b must be a huge integer.
Any large number that you run into in a newspaper or magazine or an astronomy or physics text is almost surely describable in a dozen syllables, twenty at most.
For instance, Avogadros number (610 23) can be specified in a very compact fashion (six times ten to the twentythird  a mere eight syllables).
And thus the idea of the smallest uninteresting integer backfires on itself in a manner clearly echoing the backfiring of Berrys definition of b.
How many distinct languages lay along the pathway from Latin to Italian?
How many distinct languages were spoken en route from Neanderthal days to Latin?
Is Church Latin a language?
And Pig Latin?
From there, Chaitin and others went on to develop an important new branch of mathematics known as algorithmic information theory.
Idealistic Dreams about Metamathematics Back in those heady days of my youth, every time I entered a university bookstore (and that was as often as possible), I would instantly swoop down on the mathematics section and scour all the books that had to do with symbolic logic and the nature of symbols and meaning.
Thus I bought book after book on these topics, such as Rudolf Carnaps famous but forbidding The Logical Syntax of Language and Richard Martins Truth and Denotation, not to mention countless texts of symbolic logic.
When I was sixteen, I had the unusual experience of teaching symbolic logic at Stanford Elementary School (my own elementary-school alma mater), using a brand-new text by the philosopher and educator Patrick Suppes, who happened to live down the street from our family, and whose classic Introduction to Logic had been one of my most reliable guides.
Suppes was conducting an experiment to see if patterns of strict logical inference could be inculcated in children in the same way as arithmetic could, and the schools principal, who knew me well from my years there, one day bumped into me in the schools rotunda, and asked me if I would like to teach the sixth-grade class (which included my sister Laura) symbolic logic three times a week for a whole year.
I taught my class the use of many rules of inference, including the mellifluous modus tollendo tollens and the impressive-sounding hypothetical syllogism, and all the while I was honing my skills not only as a novice logician but also as a teacher.
Intricately woven together, then, in my adolescent mind were the study of pattern (mathematics) and the study of paradoxes (metamathematics).
And the only larger number in these two lists  16  is also a multiple of 4.
Mathematical reasoning seemed to have been precisely characterized as the repeated use of certain basic rules of logic, dubbed rules of inference, such as modus ponens: If you have proven a result X and you have also proven X  Y (where the arrow represents the concept of implication, so that the line means If X is true, then Y is also true), then you can toss Y into the bin of proven results.
To cast allegorical light on this, imagine someone chanced one day to fish up a giant diamond, a magnificent ruby, and a tiny pearl at the bottom of the great green Caspian Sea in central Asia, and other seekers of fortune, spurred on by these stunning finds, then started madly dredging the bottom of the worlds largest lake to seek more diamonds, rubies, pearls, emeralds, topazes, etc., but none was found, no matter how much dredging was done.
The two phenomena involved  integer powers with arbitrarily large exponents, on the one hand, and Fibonacci numbers on the other  simply seemed (like gemstones and the Caspian Sea) to be too conceptually remote from each other to have any deep, systematic, inevitable interrelationship.
The image of the organic growth of an infinite structure or pattern, all springing out of a finite set of initial seeds, struck Gdel as much more than a mere curiosity; in fact, it reminded him of the fact that theorems in PM (like theorems in Euclids Elements) always spring (by formal rules of inference) from earlier theorems in PM, with the exception of the first few theorems, which are declared by fiat to be theorems, and thus are called axioms (analogues to the seeds).
That, indeed, is the whole idea of symbolic logic, first suggested by Aristotle and then developed piecemeal over many centuries by such thinkers as Blaise Pascal, Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz, George Boole, Augustus De Morgan, Gottlob Frege, Giuseppe Peano, David Hilbert, and many others.
Gdel himself had great respect for the power of PM, as is shown by the opening sentences of his 1931 article: The development of mathematics in the direction of greater exactness has  as is well known  led to large tracts of it becoming formalized, so that proofs can be carried out according to a few mechanical rules.
For instance, suppose that the (arbitrary) code number for the symbol 0 is 2, and the code number for the symbol = is 6.
Of course this is a rather large integer for such a short formula, and you can easily imagine that the integer corresponding to a fifty-symbol formula is astronomical, since it involves putting the first fifty prime numbers to various powers and then multiplying all those big numbers together, to make a true colossus.
Thus an arbitrarily long sequence of formulas could be converted into one large integer via essentially the same technique, using primes and exponents.
One example would be the wff numbers, which are those integers that, via Gdels code, represent well-formed or meaningful formulas of PM, as opposed to those that represent meaningless or ungrammatical strings.
Since, as it happens, longer wffs are built up in PM from shorter wffs by just a few simple and standard rules of typographical juxtaposition, their larger code numbers can likewise be built up from the smaller code numbers of shorter ones by just a few simple and standard rules of numerical calculation.
Glimmerings of How PM Can Twist Around and See Itself Gdel saw that the game of building up an infinite class of numbers, such as wff numbers, through recursion  that is, making new members of the club by combining older, established members via some number-crunching rule  is essentially the same idea as Fibonaccis recursive game of building up the class of F numbers by taking sums of earlier members.
Thats very easy  the rule that makes new F numbers always makes larger ones from smaller ones, and so once weve passed a certain size, theres no chance well be returning to pick up other numbers in that vicinity later.
Lets think a little bit more about the recursively defined club of numbers that we called wff numbers.
The distinction between members and non-members of the wff club is every bit as genuine a number-theoretical distinction as that between members and non-members of the club of squares, the club of prime numbers, or the club of F numbers, for wff numbers are definable in a recursive arithmetical (i.e., computational) fashion.
in the recursively defined sequence of wff numbers.
One could be completely ignorant of the fact that Gdels wff numbers had their origin in Russell and Whiteheads rules defining wellformedness in Principia Mathematica, just as one can study the laws of probability without ever suspecting that this deep branch of mathematics was originally developed to analyze gambling.
Now wff numbers are, as it happens, relatively easy to define in a recursive fashion, and for that reason wff-ness (exactly like F-ness) is just the kind of mathematical notion that Principia Mathematica was designed to study.
Prim Numbers Having realized that some hypothetical volume of the series by Whitehead and Russell could define and systematically explore the various numerical properties of wff numbers, Gdel pushed his analogy further and showed, with a good deal of fancy machinery but actually not very much conceptual difficulty, that there was an infinitely more interesting recursively defined class of whole numbers, which I shall here call prim numbers (whimsically saluting the title of the famous three tomes), and which are the numbers belonging to provable formulas of PM (i.e., theorems).
There is a crucial difference between wff numbers and prim numbers, which comes from the fact that the rules of inference of PM sometimes produce output strings that are shorter than their input strings.
This means that the corresponding arithmetical rules defining prim numbers will sometimes take large prim numbers as input and make from them a smaller prim number as output.
Just as with squares, primes, F numbers, or wff numbers, there could once again be a hypothetical volume of the series of tomes by Whitehead and Russell in which prim numbers were defined and their mathematical properties studied.
This claim is very similar to the assertion 72900 is not a prime number, although, to be sure, g is a lot larger than 72900, and primness is a far pricklier property than is primeness.
Sometimes this second phraseology is pointedly rendered as I am not a theorem or, even more tersely, as I am unprovable (where in the PM system is tacitly understood).
This sentence is false.
Look at the following sentence fragment, which Ill call Quines Quasi-Quip: preceded by itself in quote marks yields a full sentence.
Then Quines Quasi-Quip will turn into a full sentence, so Ill call it Quines Quip: Professor Quine preceded by itself in quote marks yields a full sentence.
So lets use this as the noun to place in front of Quines Quasi-Quip: is white preceded by itself in quote marks yields a full sentence.
Here, then, is Quines Quasi-Quip with a quoted copy of itself installed in front: preceded by itself in quote marks yields a full sentence preceded by itself in quote marks yields a full sentence.
Well, in this case, the analogue is the following: preceded by itself in quote marks yields a full sentence preceded by itself in quote marks yields a full sentence.
So Quines Quip talks about itself, claiming of itself that it is a full sentence (which it surely is, even though it is built out of two subjectless sentence fragments, one in quote marks and one not).
And then, making a move analogous to that of feeding Quines Quasi-Quip into itself (but in quotes), he took that formula fragments Gdel number k (which is a specific number, not a variable) and replaced the variable x by it, thus producing a formula (not just a fragment) that made a claim about a much larger integer, g. And g is the Gdel number of that very claim.
The above sentence is neither fish nor fowl, for it is not a formula of Principia Mathematica but an English sentence, so of course it doesnt have a Gdel number and it couldnt possibly be a theorem (or a nontheorem) of PM.
And you might also try to remember that the little number k is the Gdel number of a formula fragment containing a variable x, analogous to a subjectless sentence fragment in quote marks, while the larger number g is the Gdel number of a complete sentence in PM notation, analogous to a complete sentence in English.
To be specific, not only do they have the large box in their own hands, but they can see the little box the girl is holding, and the two boxes have a lot in common (their cylindrical shape, their dark-blue color, their white caps at both ends); and in case thats not enough, they can also see salt spilling out of the little one.
These pieces of evidence suffice to convince everyone that the little box and the large box are identical, and there you have it: self-reference without infinite regress!
Standing in line with a friend in a caf, I spot a large chocolate cake on a platter behind the counter, and I ask the server to give me a piece of it.
It is all too easy to forget that moths, flies, dogs, cats, neonates, television cameras, and other small-souled beings do not perceive a television screen as we do.
This play is about a wildcat strike called by the workers at Alf and Berties Posh Shop (I admit, I never did figure out what they sold there).
In fact, the picketing Posh Shop worker named Cagey, who disgustedly proclaims, after a brash matron pushes her aside and arrogantly strides into Alf and Berties upscale showroom, Anyone who crosses the picket line in front of Alf and Berties Posh Shop is scum, was inevitably heard by everyone in the audience (which by definition consisted solely of people who had crossed the picket line outside the theater) as saying, Anyone who crossed the picket line in front of this theater is scum, and of course this amounted to saying, Anyone who is now sitting in this audience is scum, which could also be heard as You should not be listening to these lines, which was the diametric opposite of what all the actors, including the one playing the part of Cagey, wanted to tell their audience, whose entry into the theater they so much appreciated, given the ushers hostile picket line.
Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica Well, so much for Rosalyn Wadhead and the surprise double-edgedness of the lines in The Posh Shop Picketeers, admittedly a rather obscure work.
Well talk instead about the world-famous play Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica, penned in the years 19101913 by the celebrated British playwright Y. Ted Enrustle (surely youve heard of him!).
For example, early on in Act I, the beautiful Princess Bloppia famously exclaims, 7 times 11 times 13 equals 1001!, to which the handsome Prince Hyppia excitedly retorts, Wherefore the number 1001 is composite and not prime! Theirs would seem to be a math made in heaven.
The climax comes when Princess Bloppia mentions an arithmetical fact about a certain very large integer g, and Prince Hyppia replies, Wherefore the number g is saucy and not prim! (Its a rare audience that fails to gasp in unison when they hear Hyppias most math-dramatical outburst.)
However, as everyone today knows, this remark of Prince Hyppia asserts  via the intermediary link of a tight analogy  that a certain long line of typographical symbols is unpennable using a standard set of conventions of dramaturgy that held, way back in those bygone days.
And the funny thing is that the allegedly unpennable line is none other than the proclamation that the actor playing Prince Hyppia has just pronounced!
Nonetheless, when, nearly two decades later, this droll coincidence was revealed to the playgoing public in a wickedly witty review entitled On Formerly Unpennable Proclamations in Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica and Related Stageplays (I), authored by the acerbic young Turko-Viennese drama critic Gerd Klot (Ill skip the details here, as the story is so well known), its piercing cogency was immediately appreciated by many, and as a result, playgoers who had read Klots irreverent review became able to rehear many of the famous lines uttered in Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica as if they were not about numbers at all, despite what Y. Ted Enrustle had intended, but were direct (and often quite biting) comments about Y. Ted Enrustles play itself!
And thus it wasnt long before savvy audiences were reinterpreting the droll remarks by the oddball numerologist Q Dzhii (a character in Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica who had gained notoriety for her nearly nonstop jabbering about why she preferred saucy numbers to prim numbers) as revealing, via allusions that now seemed hilariously obvious, why she preferred dramatic lines that were unpennable (using the dramaturgical conventions of the day) to lines that were pennable.
Drama lovers considered this new way of understanding the play too delicious for words, for it revealed Prince Hyppia to be a play-about-a-play (with a vengeance!
Indeed, he went so far as to insist that Gerd Klots review could not conceivably be about Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica but had to be about another play, possibly a related play, perhaps an analogous play, perchance even a perfectly parallel play, peradventure a play with a similarsounding title penned by a pair of paranoiac paradoxophobes, but in any case it was not about his play.
The height of the irony was that, in the case of a few choice arithmetical remarks such as Prince Hyppias famous outburst, it was easier and more natural to hear them as referring to unpennable lines in plays than to hear them as referring to non-prim numbers!
Now, now, I hear some voice protesting (but of course its not your voice), how on earth could you have really been talking about Whitehead and Russell and Principia Mathematica if the lines you wrote were not about them but about Y. Ted Enrustle and Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica and such things? Well, once again, its all thanks to the power of analogy; its the same game as in a roman  clef, where a novelist speaks, not so secretly, about people in real life by ostensibly speaking solely about fictional characters, but where savvy readers know precisely who stands for whom, thanks to analogies so compelling and so glaring that, taken in their cultural context, they cannot be missed by anyone sufficiently sophisticated.
Something may have troubled you when you learned that Prince Hyppias famous line about the number g proclaims (via analogy) its own unpennability.
Or, turning this question around, how could Prince Hyppias classic line be found in Y. Ted Enrustles play if it never was penned at all?
For a strictly rule-bound playwright to pen such a line would be seen as extremely inconsistent; a churlish drama critic, ever reaching for cute new ways to snipe, might even write, Xs play is so mega-inconsistent! And thus, perhaps it was the recognition of Y. Ted Enrustles unexpected and bizarre-o mega-inconsistency that invariably caused audiences to gasp at Prince Hyppias math-dramatic outburst.
Not is Not the Source of Strangeness A reader might conclude that a strange loop necessarily involves a self-undermining or self-negating quality (This formula is not provable; This line is not pennable; You should not be attending this play).
In the cases of both Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica and Principia Mathematica, we saw that a system carefully designed to talk only about numbers and not to talk about itself nonetheless ineluctably winds up talking about itself in a cagey fashion  and it does so precisely because of the chameleonic nature of numbers, which are so rich and complex that numerical patterns have the flexibility to mirror any other kind of pattern.
Every bit as strange a loop, although perhaps a little less dramatic, would have been created if Gdel had concocted a self-affirming formula that cockily asserted of itself, This formula is provable via the rules of PM, which to me is reminiscent of the brashness of Muhammad (Im the greatest) Ali as well as of Salvador (The great) Dal.
Indeed, some years after Gdel, such self-affirming formulas were concocted and studied by logicians such as Martin Hugo Lb and Leon Henkin.
I should, however, immediately point out that a phrase such as this formula is nowhere to be found inside Gdels cagey formula  no more than the phrase this audience is contained in Cageys line Anyone who crosses the picket line to go into Alf and Berties Posh Shop is scum. The unanticipated meaning People in this audience are scum is, rather, the inevitable outcome of a blatantly obvious analogy (or mapping) between two entirely different picket lines (one outside the theater, one on stage), and thus, by extension, between the picketcrossing members of the audience and the picket-line crossers in the play they are watching.
Four centuries ago, launching this whole tendency, Galileo Galilei had famously declared, The book of Nature is written in the language of mathematics (a thought that must seem shocking to people who love nature but hate mathematics).
Just as it is no miracle that a video system can create a selfreferential loop, but rather a kind of obvious triviality due to the power of TV cameras (or, to put it more precisely, the immensely rich representational power of very large arrays of pixels), so too it is no miracle that Principia Mathematica (or any other comparable system) contains self-focused sentences like Gdels formula, for the system of integers, exactly like a TV camera (only more so!
CHAPTER 12 On Downward Causality Bertrand Russells Worst Nightmare TO MY mind, the most unexpected emergent phenomenon to come out of Kurt Gdels 1931 work is a bizarre new type of mathematical causality (if I can use that unusual term).
If youll recall, he wrote, speaking of Principia Mathematica and Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory: These two systems are so extensive that all methods of proof used in mathematics today have been formalized in them, i.e., reduced to a few axioms and rules of inference. What Gdel articulates here was virtually a universal credo at the time, and so his revelation of PMs incompleteness, in the twenty-five pages that followed, came like a sudden thunderbolt from the bluest of skies.
Strings provable in the larger and allegedly superior system Super-PM would be isomorphically imitated by a richer set of numbers than the prim numbers (hence lets call them super-prim numbers).
At this point, just as he did for PM, Gdel would promptly create a new formula KH for Super-PM that said, The number h is not a super-prim number, and of course he would do it in such a way that h would be the Gdel number of KH itself.
The old proverb puts it succinctly: The bigger they are, the harder they fall. In other words, the hole in PM (and in any other axiomatic system as rich as PM) is not due to some careless oversight by Russell and Whitehead but is simply an inevitable property of any system that is flexible enough to capture the chameleonic quality of whole numbers.
PM is rich enough to be able to turn around and point at itself, like a television camera pointing at the screen to which it is sending its image.
The fact that you cant get around Gdels black-belt trickery by enriching or enlarging PM in any fashion is called essential incompleteness  Bertrand Russells second-worst nightmare.
An Endless Succession of Monsters Not only does extending PM fail to save the boat from sinking, but worse, KG is far from being the only hole in PM.
In that case, you might decide to switch goals and try out various approaches to the nearby rival peak  namely, Imps negation  Imp  which is the statement There are not infinitely many perfect numbers, which is tantamount to asserting that there is a largest perfect number (reminiscent of our old friend P, allegedly the largest prime number in the world).
But suppose that through a stunning stroke of genius you discovered a new kind of Gdel ray (i.e., some clever new Gdel numbering, including all of the standard Gdel machinery that makes prim numbers dance in perfect synchrony with provable strings) that allowed you to see through to a hidden second level of meaning belonging to Imp  a hidden meaning that proclaimed, to those lucky few who knew how to decipher it, The integer i is not prim, where i happened to be the Gdel number of Imp itself.
Gdel revealed to us that there is a profound gulf between truth and provability in PM (indeed, in any formal axiomatic system like PM).
In other words, the set of all wff numbers is divided into two complementary parts by the true/false dichotomy, but the boundary line is so peculiar and elusive that it is not characterizable in any mathematical fashion at all.
By contrast, in the case of a creature that thinks with a brain (or with a careenium), reading its own brain activity at a high level is natural and trivial (for instance, I remember how terrified I was that time when Grandma took me to see The Wizard of Oz), whereas the low-level activities that underwrite the high level (numberless neurotransmitters hopping like crazy across synaptic gaps, or simms silently bashing by the billions into each other) are utterly hidden, unsuspected, invisible.
A creature that thinks knows next to nothing of the substrate allowing its thinking to happen, but nonetheless it knows all about its symbolic interpretation of the world, and knows very intimately something it calls I.
When microscopic structures were finally found that allowed a physical picture to be attached to the abstract notion, they turned out to be wildly unexpected entities: a gene was revealed to be a mediumlength stretch of a very long helically twisting cord made of just four kinds of molecules (nucleotides) linked one to the next to form a chain millions of units long.
That is, the proper description of how heredity and reproduction worked could in large part be abstracted away from the chemistry, leaving just a high-level picture of information-manipulating processes alone.
At the heart of these information-manipulating processes lay a high abstraction called the genetic code, which mapped every possible three-nucleotide word (or codon), of which there are sixty-four, to one of twenty different molecules belonging to a totally unrelated chemical family (the amino acids).
Obviously the elementary particles take care of themselves, not caring at all about the informational levels of biomolecules (let alone about human perceptual categories or abstract beliefs or I-ness or patriotism or the burning desire, on the part of a particular large agglomeration of biomolecules, to compose a set of twenty-four preludes and fugues).
The laws of particle physics dont respect such notions as hog, cell, gene, or genetic code, or even the notion of amino acid.
The laws of particle physics involve only particles, and larger macroscopic boundaries drawn for the convenience of thinking beings are no more relevant to them than votingprecinct boundaries are to butterflies.
This is far too large a task for finite folks like us, and so we have to settle for a compromise, which is to look at things at a less inclusive, less detailed level, but (fortunately for us) a more insight-providing level, namely the informational level.
And they implicitly accept the fact that this new, leaner and meaner way of talking suggests that genes, thanks to their informational qualities, have their own causal properties  or in other words, that certain extremely abstract large-scale events or states of affairs (for example, the high-level regularity that golden retrievers tend to be very gentle and friendly) can validly be attributed to meanings of molecules.
My list is a random walk through an everyday kind of mental space, drawn up in order to give a feel for the phenomena in which we place the most stock and in which we most profoundly believe (sour grapes and wild goose chases being quite real to most of us), as opposed to the forbidding and inaccessible level of quarks and gluons, or the only slightly more accessible level of genes and ribosomes and transfer RNA  levels of reality to which we may pay lip service but which very few of us ever think about or talk about.
Our perceptions and actions focus on far larger, vaguer things, and our deepest beliefs, far from being in electrons, are in the many macroscopic items that we are continually assigning to our high-frequency and low-frequency mental categories (such as fast food and doggie bags on the one hand, and feet of clay and customer service departments on the other), and also in the perceived causality, however blurry and unreliable it may be, that seems to hold among these large and vague items.
I could go on and say similar things about how we always perceive love affairs and other grand themes of human life in terms of intangible everyday patterns belonging to the large-scale world, and never in terms of the interactions of elementary particles.
In contrast to declaring that quantum electrodynamics is what makes the world go round, I could instead cite such eternally elusive mysteries as beauty, generosity, sexuality, insecurity, fidelity, jealousy, loneliness, and on and on, making sure not to leave out that wonderful tingling of two souls that we curiously call chemistry, and that the French, even more curiously, describe as avoir des atomes crochus, which means having atoms that are hooked together.
An I loop, like an audio feedback loop, is an abstraction  but an abstraction that seems immensely real, almost physically palpable, to beings like us, beings that have high readings on the hunekometer.
I Am My Brains Most Complex Symbol Like a careenium (and also like PM), a brain can be seen on at (at least) two levels  a low level involving very small physical processes (perhaps involving particles, perhaps involving neurons  take your pick), and a high level involving large structures selectively triggerable by perception, which in this book I have called symbols, and which are the structures in our brain that constitute our categories.
My vast episodic memory of my past, together with its counterpart pointing blurrily towards what is yet to come (my episodic projectory, I think Ill call it), and further embellished by a fantastic folio of alternative versions or subjunctive replays of countless episodes (if only X had happened; how lucky that Y never took place, wouldnt it be great if Z were to occur  and why not call this my episodic subjunctory?
This is only one side of the truth, of course, since it utterly snubs the viewpoint whereby an impersonal physics of micro-entities is what makes the world go round, but it is a surprisingly reliable and totally indispensable distortion.
Very small representational systems, such as those of bacteria, ova, sperms, plants, thermostats, and so forth, do not enjoy the luxury of self-representation.
As we go through thousands of experiences large and small, our representations of these experiences likewise accrete to our selfsymbols.
making all sorts of entities in its environment react in large or small ways, and it internalizes those effects in terms of its coarse-grained categories (as to their graininess, it has no choice).
Her stress in the book is on those aspects of this image that are illusory and thus tend to be harmful, but the full structure in which such neurotic distortions reside is much larger.
An event takes place in front of the camera and thus is sent onto the screen, but in simplified form, since continuous shapes (shapes with very fine grain) have been rendered on a grid made of discrete pixels (a coarse-grained medium).
The new screen is then taken in by the camera and fed back in, and around and around it goes.
The overall gestalt shape of ones self  the stable whorl, so to speak, of the strange loop constituting ones I  is not picked up by a disinterested, neutral camera, but is perceived in a highly subjective manner through the active processes of categorizing, mental replaying, reflecting, comparing, counterfactualizing, and judging.
Even the vaguest, most fleeting allusion to particle physics in that context would seem to constitute an absurd non sequitur, for what on earth could gluons and muons and protons and photons, of all things, have to do with a little boy imitating his idol, Hopalong Cassidy?
In Chapter 1, when I spoke of small souls and large souls, I said that this is not a black-and-white matter but one of degree.
Could a mosquito think a thought even vaguely reminiscent of I can smile just like Hopalong Cassidy!  for example, I can bite just like Buzzaround Betty!?
I think the answer to these and similar questions is quite obviously, No way in the world! (thanks to the incredibly spartan symbol repertoire of a mosquito brain, barely larger than the symbol repertoire of a flush toilet or a thermostat), and accordingly, I have no qualms about dismissing the idea of there being a strange loop of selfhood in as tiny and swattable a brain as that of a mosquito.
The Supposed Selves of Robot Vehicles I was most impressed when I read about Stanley, a robot vehicle developed at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory that not too long ago drove all by itself across the Nevada desert, relying just on its laser rangefinders, its television camera, and GPS navigation.
At one point, Stanleys video camera picked up another robot vehicle ahead of it (this was H1, a rival vehicle from Carnegie-Mellon University) and eventually Stanley pulled around H1 and left it in its dust.
One can see this event taking place on the videotape made by that camera, and it is the climax of the whole story.
Would it suffice for Stanleys rigidly mounted TV camera to be able to turn around on itself and for Stanley thereby to acquire visual imagery of itself?
This would require the vehicle to have a full episodic memory of thousands of experiences it had had, as well as an episodic projectory (what it would expect to happen in its life, and what it would hope, and what it would fear), as well as an episodic subjunctory, detailing its thoughts about near misses it had had, and what would most likely have happened had things gone some other way.
Evolutionary pressures, however, gradually made brains triage of their environments grow more complex and multilayered, and eventually (here were talking millions or billions of years), the repertoire of categories that were being responded to grew so rich that the system, like a TV camera on a sufficiently long leash, was capable of pointing back, to some extent, at itself.
One might as well look for an I inside a stone fortress, a toilets tank, a roll of toilet paper, a television, a thermostat, a heat-seeking missile, a heap of beer cans, or an oil refinery.
The symbols in our brains truly do do that voodoo that they do so well, and they do it in the electrochemical soup of neural events.
In which the Alfbert Visits Austranius Imagine, if you will, the small, lonely planet of Austranius, whose sole inhabitants are a tribe called the Kldgerot.
On a fateful d in the Austranian mnth of Sp, a strange-looking orange spacecraft swoops down from the distant planet of Ukia and lands exactly at the North P of Austranius.
Bright and early the next d, the Alfbert solemnly convenes a meeting of all the Kldgerot on Austranius.
It is my privilege to report to you that I have made an Austranius-shaking scientific discovery. The Kldgerot all sit in respectful if skeptical silence.
Yes, denizens of Austranius, fabulously unlikely though it may sound, in each PM string there resides meaning.
On these words, it trundles back to its strange-looking orange spacecraft at the North P, takes one last glance at the bleak Kldgerot-littered landscape of Austranius, and finally presses the small round Takeoff button on the crafts leatherette dashboard, setting off for destinations unknown.
I suspect that its symbol-count might well exceed Grahams constant, which is usually cited as the largest number ever to appear in a mathematical proof, but even if not, it would certainly give it a run for its money.
So the idea of anyone directly reading the strings that grow on Austranius, whether on a low level, as statements about whole numbers, or on a high level, as statements about their own edibility, is utter nonsense.
(Of course, so is the idea that strings of mathematical symbols could grow in jungles on a faraway planet, as well as the idea that they could be eaten, but thats allegoric license.)
Soaps in Sanskrit This may sound a bit abstruse and remote, so let me suggest an analogy.
Imagine the challenge of writing out a clear explanation of the meaning of the contemporary term soap digest rack in the ancient Indian language of Sanskrit.
The key constraint is that you are restricted to using pure Sanskrit as it was in its heyday, and are not allowed to introduce even one single new word into the language.
In order to get across the meaning of soap digest rack in detail, you would have to explain, for starters, the notions of electricity and electromagnetic waves, of TV cameras and transmitters and TV sets, of TV shows and advertising, the notion of washing machines and rivalries between detergent companies, the idea of daily episodes of predictable hackneyed melodramas broadcast into the homes of millions of people, the image of viewers addicted to endlessly circling plots, the concept of a grocery store, of a checkout stand, of magazines, of display racks, and on and on Each of the words soap, digest, and rack would wind up being expanded into a chain of ancient Sanskrit words thousands of times longer than itself.
To return to the Sanskrit challenge, imagine that I changed the rules, allowing you to define new Sanskrit words and to employ them in the definitions of yet further new Sanskrit words.
Thus electricity could be defined and used in the description of TV cameras and televisions and washing machines, and TV program could be used in the definition of soap opera, and so forth.
If abbreviations could thus be piled on abbreviations in an unlimited fashion, then it is likely that instead of producing a book-length Sanskrit explanation of soap digest rack, you would need only a few pages, perhaps even less.
Of course, in all this, you would have radically changed the Sanskrit language, carrying it forwards in time a few thousand years, but that is how languages always progress.
As I observed in Chapter 11, a dog does not imagine or understand that certain large arrays of colored dots can be so structured that they are no longer just huge sets of colored dots but become pictures of people, houses, dogs, and many other things.
Your typical human brain, being blissfully ignorant of its minute physical components and their arcanely mathematizable mode of microscopic functioning, and thriving instead at the infinitely remote level of soap operas, spring sales, super skivaganzas, SUVs, SATs, SOBs, Santa Claus, splashtacular scuba specials, snorkels, snowballs, sex scandals (and lets not forget sleazeballs), makes up as plausible a story as it can about its own nature, in which the starring role, rather than being played by the cerebral cortex, the hippocampus, the amygdala, the cerebellum, or any other weirdly named and gooey physical structure, is played instead by an anatomically invisible, murky thing called I, aided and abetted by other shadowy players known as ideas, thoughts, memories, beliefs, hopes, fears intentions, desires, love, hate, rivalry, jealousy, empathy, honesty, and on and on  and in the soft, ethereal, neurology-free world of these players, your typical human brain perceives its very own I as a pusher and a mover, never entertaining for a moment the idea that its star player might merely be a useful shorthand standing for a myriad of infinitesimal entities and the invisible chemical transactions taking place among them, by the billions  nay, the millions of billions  every single second.
What makes a strange loop appear in a brain and not in a video feedback system, then, is an ability  the ability to think  which is, in effect, a one-syllable word standing for the possession of a sufficiently large repertoire of triggerable symbols.
In the scientific world, such an assertion runs a great risk of being looked upon with skepticism, because it sounds superficially as if it reeks of Cartesian dualism (wonderfully mystical-sounding terms such as lan vital, life force, spirit of the hive, entelechy, and holons occasionally spring into my mind when I read this passage).
Since we all perceive and represent hundreds of other human beings at vastly differing levels of detail and fidelity inside our cranium, and since the most important facet of all of those human beings is their own sense of self, we inevitably mirror, and thus house, a large number of other strange loops inside our head.
If one points a TV camera at the middle of a blank screen, and if the camera sees only the screen and none of its frame, then despite its loopiness, all that this setup will produce, whether the camera stands still, tilts, turns, or zooms in and out (always without reaching the screens edge), is a fixed white image.
If, however, the camera turns far enough left or right, or zooms out far enough to take in something external to the blank screen (even just the tiniest patch of color), a bit of the screen will turn non-blank, and then, instantly, that non-blank patch will get sucked into the video loop and cycled around and around, like a tree limb picked up by a tornado.
If we bring this metaphor back to the context of human identity, we could say that a bare strange loop of selfhood does not give rise to a distinct self  it is just a generic, vanilla shell that requires contact with something else in the world in order to start acquiring a distinctive identity, a distinctive I.
Baby Feedback Loops and Baby I s Although I just conjured up the notion of a vanilla strange loop in a human brain, I certainly did not mean to suggest that a human baby is already at birth endowed with such a bare strange loop of selfhood  that is, a fully-realized, though vanilla, shell of pure, distilled I-ness  thanks to the mere fact of having human genes.
Suppose two video cameras and two televisions are set up so that camera A feeds screen A and, far away from it, camera B feeds screen B.
Suppose moreover that at all times, camera A picks up all of what is on screen A (plus some nearby stuff, to give the A-loop content) and cycles it back onto A, and analogously, camera B picks up all of what is on screen B (plus some external content) and cycles it back onto B.
If the local scenes picked up by cameras A and B are different, then screens A and B will have clearly distinguishable patterns on them, so the two systems identities will be easily told apart.
Lets assume, as would seem natural, that camera A is closer to screen A than it is to screen B (and vice versa).
Then loop A will take up more space on screen A than does loop B, meaning more pixels, and so loop A will be reproduced with higher fidelity on screen A. Loop A will be large and fine-grained, loop B will be small and coarse-grained.
On screen B, everything is reversed: loop B will be larger and finer-grained, while loop A will be smaller and of coarser grain.
The last thing I want to remind you of before we go on to a new paragraph is that now loop A, although its still called just A, nonetheless involves loop B as well (and vice versa); each of these two loops now plays a role in defining the other one, though loop A plays a larger role in its own definition than does loop B (and vice versa).
One Privileged Loop inside our Skull Suppose some future television technology managed to eliminate the graininess of cameras and screens, so that all images were flawless at all scales.
The difference is that camera A is feeding its image directly to screen A (and not screen B), while camera B is directly feeding screen B (and not screen A).
Thus, if camera A tilts or zooms in, then the entire image on screen A follows suit and also tilts or grows larger, whereas the image on screen B stays put.
(To be sure, the nested image of screen A on screen B will tilt or grow, all the way down the line of ever-more-nested images  but the orientation and size of the top-level screen in system B will remain unchanged, while those of the top-level screen in system A will be directly affected by what camera A does.)
A pair of identical twins in Twinwirld is called, rather inevitably, a pairson or a dividual (or even just a dual).
We now come to the tricky matter of pairsonal pronouns in Twinwirld.
There was once even an author in Twinwirld who concocted a curious philosophical fantasy-world called Twinnwirrld, whose defining feature was that 99 percent of all births resulted in so-called identical twinns  but thats a whole nother story.
In this new fantasy world, which Ill dub Siamese Twinwirld, instead of positing that 99 percent of births yield standard identical twins, Ill posit that 99 percent of births yield Siamese twins joined, say, at the hip.
Moreover, Ill stipulate that the Twinwirld pronoun i doesnt exist in Siamese Twinwirld.
This may seem extremely far-fetched, but the curious thing is, our standard earthly world has much in common with Siamese Twinwirld.
In short, our own human condition in this, the real world, is quite analogous to that of pairsons in Siamese Twinwirld.
I had forgotten this email from Dan, so I decided to go look the reference up in his book, and I found the following passage: We can imagine. two or more bodies sharing a single self.
These identical twins, now in their forties and living together in a hostel, seem to act as one; they collaborate on the speaking of single speech acts, for instance, finishing each others sentences with ease or speaking in unison, with one just a split-second behind.
O thou charming bridal pair, Providence shall eer caress thee And from Zion God shall bless thee And shall guide thee, eer and eer, O thou charming bridal pair!
Its first line would run, Jetzt bin ich ein strahlendes Paar  I now am a radiant couple  and the new wife and husband would sing it precisely in unison from start to finish, instead of singing two melodies in typical Bachian counterpoint, for doing that would inappropriately draw attention to their distinct identities.
And so, if I have managed to get my readers to open their minds to the counterintuitive notion of a pair of bodies as the potential joint locus of one soul  that is, to be able to identify with a pairson such as Karen or Greg as easily as they identify with R2-D2 or with C-3PO in Star Wars  then Twinwirld will have discharged its duty well.
No, a gene is a pattern  a particular sequence of nucleotides (usually encoded on paper by a sequence of letters from the four-letter alphabet ACGT).
The sharing of so much, particularly concerning our two children, aligned our souls in some intangible yet visceral manner, and in some dimensions of life turned us into a single unit that acted as a whole, much as a school of fish acts as a single-minded higher-level entity.
Desperate Lark In the surreal months following the tragedy of Carols sudden death, I found myself ceaselessly haunted by the mystery of the vanishing of her consciousness, which made no sense at all to me, and by the undeniable fact that I kept on thinking of her in the present, which also confused me.
There is an old racing sailboat in Maine, near where I sail, and I love to see it on the starting line with me, for it is perhaps the most beautiful sailboat I have ever seen; its name is Desperate Lark, which I also think is beautiful.
Also being a believer in the thesis that external memory is a very real part of our personal memories, I think that an infinitesimal sliver of Carols consciousness resides even in the slips of paper on which I captured some of her cleverer bon mots, and a somewhat larger (though still tiny) shard of her resides in the yellow lined notebooks in which I have, in the past few months of grieving, recorded so many of our joint experiences.
And of course, in addition to a photo of someone and the set of someones complete works, there are so many other cases of elaborate patterns that contain fragments of souls  imagine, for example, having many hours of videotapes of Bach playing the organ and talking about his music, or of James Clerk Maxwell talking about physics and describing the moment when he discovered that light must be an electromagnetic wave, or of Pushkin reciting his own poetry, or of Galileo telling about how he discovered the moons of Jupiter, or of Jane Austen explaining how she imagined her characters and their complex intrigues Just where comes the point of critical mass, when having a pattern, perhaps a large set of videotapes, perhaps an extensive diary (like Anne Franks), amounts to having a significant percentage of the person  a significant percentage of their self, their soul, their I, their consciousness, their interiority?
If you concede that a significant percentage of the person would exist at some point along this spectrum, provided that one had a sufficiently large pattern, then it seems to me that you would have to concede that even having a much smaller pattern, such as a photo or my cherished collection of Carols bonner mots, already gives you a non-zero (even if microscopic) fraction of the actual person  of the view from inside  not just of how it was to be with them.
For a while, ones speaking is largely fake  that is, one is thinking in ones native language but substituting words quickly enough to give the impression that the thinking is going on in the second language; however, as ones experience with the second language grows, new grammatical habits form and turn slowly into reflexes, as do thousands of lexical items, and the second language becomes more and more rooted, more and more genuine.
Inspired by Gdels mapping of PM into itself, Alan Turing realized that the critical threshold for this kind of computational universality comes at exactly that point where a machine is flexible enough to read and correctly interpret a set of data that describe its own structure.
The Unexpectedness of Universality There is a tight analogy linking universal machines of this sort with the universality I earlier spoke of (though I didnt use that word) when I described the power of Principia Mathematica.
That idea was not on their radar screen (for that matter, radar itself wasnt on anybodys radar screen back then).
By and large, the engineers who designed the earliest electronic computers were as unaware as Russell and Whitehead had been of the richness that they were unwittingly bringing into being.
But at some point, when Alan Turings abstract theory of computation, based in large part on Gdels 1931 paper, collided with the concrete engineering realities, some of the more perceptive people (Turing himself and John von Neumann especially) put two and two together and realized that their machines, incorporating the richness of integer arithmetic that Gdel had shown was so potent, were thereby universal.
Universal Beings We human beings, too, are universal machines of a different sort: our neural hardware can copy arbitrary patterns, even if evolution never had any grand plan for this kind of representational universality to come about.
Representational universality also means that we can import ideas and happenings without having to be direct witnesses to them.
On a skiing vacation in the Sierra Nevada, far away from home, my children and I took advantage of the doggie cam at the Bloomington kennel where we had boarded our golden retriever Ollie, and thanks to the World Wide Web, we were treated to a jerky sequence of stills of a couple of dozen dogs meandering haphazardly in a fenced-in play area outdoors, looking a bit like particles undergoing random Brownian motion, and although each pooch was rendered by a pretty small array of pixels, we could often recognize our Ollie by subtle features such as the angle of his tail.
In the world of living things, the magic threshold of representational universality is crossed whenever a systems repertoire of symbols becomes extensible without any obvious limit.
This is why we have movies, soap operas, television news, blogs, webcams, gossip columnists, People magazine, and The Weekly World News, among others.
Although I have been depicting it somewhat cynically, representational universality and the nearly insatiable hunger that it creates for vicarious experiences is but a stones throw away from empathy, which I see as the most admirable quality of humanity.
They might have some superficial textures in common here and there, but to me they are as different as Bach and Eminem.)
I remember admiring and then copying one friends uneven, jagged handwriting, a jaunty classmates cool style of blustering, an older boys swaggering walk, the way the French ticketseller in the film Around the World in Eighty Days pronounced the word amricain, a college friends habit of always saying the name of his interlocutor at the end of every phone call, and so forth.
But I also contain myriad traces of thousands of individuals whom I never could have met and interacted with, such as W. C. Fields, Galileo Galilei, Harry Houdini, Paul Klee, Clment Marot, John Baskerville, Fats Waller, Anne Frank, Holden Caulfield, Captain Nemo, Claude Monet, Leonhard Euler, Dante Alighieri, Alexander Pushkin, Eugene Onegin, James Clerk Maxwell, Samuel Pickwick, Esq., Charles Babbage, Archimedes, and Charlie Brown.
And yet, to reiterate the metaphor, since our camera and our screen are grainy, we cannot have as deep or as accurate a representation of people beloved to us as either our own self-representation or their own self-representation.
I recall certain episodes from the novel Catcher in the Rye or the movie David and Lisa as if they had happened to me  and if they didnt, so what?
My brains fertile soil is a soul-soil not identical to, but very similar to, hers.
I am reminded of a nowdefunct bar in the Bay Area whose sign amused me no end every time I drove by it: My Brothers Place.
So now your hand controls Ollies movements and you receive audiovisual input solely from the camera attached to Ollies head, for several hours nonstop.
The catch was that I was an assistant professor at Indiana University in far-off Bloomington, and I had courses to teach on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
And so each time I flew out to Stanford for a weekend, I would instantly zoom to Ventura Hall, plunk myself down at a terminal in the so-called Imlac room, and plunge furiously into the work, which was extremely intense.
One time when I had returned to Bloomington, I realized I had made a serious typesetting mistake in one chapter, and so, in panic, I called up my friend Scott Kim, who also had been spending endless hours in the Imlac room, and I was hugely relieved to find him there.
What one starts to realize, as one explores these disorienting but technologically feasible ideas of virtual presence elsewhere, is that as the telepresence technology improves, the primary location becomes less and less primary.
But one hardly needs to talk about head-mounted television cameras, remote-controlled robots, and intravenous feeding devices in order to remind people of how we routinely transport ourselves into virtual worlds.
Suppose everyone wore a tiny TV camera on the bridge of their nose, and that everyone had glasses that could be tuned to receive the signals from any selected TV camera on earth.
If there were a way of specifying a person by their GPS coordinates (and that certainly doesnt seem far-fetched), then all I would have to do is set my glasses to receive the signals from that joggers nose-mounted TV camera, and presto!
And at any point I could switch channels and go see the world through the nose-camera of my daughter Monica or my son Danny, or anyone else I wished.
Just as I could jump to California when talking on the telephone with Scott Kim in the Imlac room, so I can jump inside the other persons head whenever, through words and tones of voice, they call forth their most fervent hopes or their most agonizing fears.
Although my tongue is not caressing those little chunky deep-fried bits, something in my brain is taking a sensual delight in what I could call (in imitation of the phrase sympathetic pain) sympathetic pleasure.
Albeit in a feeble way and an hour after the fact, I am sharing Lauras pleasure.
Theres no claim that the act of copying is simultaneous or perfect or total  just that each person lives partially in the brain of the other, and that if the bandwidth were turned up more and more and more and still more, they would come to live more and more inside each other  until, in the limit, the sense of a clear boundary between them would slowly be dissolved, as it is for the two halves of a Twinwirld pairson (and even more so for a Siamese Twinwirld pairson).
This view makes as little sense to me as does panpsychism, which asserts that every entity  every stone, every picnic table, every picnic, every electron, every rainbow, every drop of water, waterfall, skyscraper, oil refinery, billboard, speedlimit sign, traffic ticket, county jail, jailbreak, track meet, election rigging, airport gate, spring sale, soap opera cancellation, photograph of Marilyn Monroe, and so on ad nauseam  is conscious.
The northwestern region called Valle dAosta is largely French-speaking, while the northeastern region called Alto Adige (also Sdtirol) is largely German-speaking.
The geographical place is merely the traditional breeding grounds for an ancient set of genes and memes  complexions, body types, hair colors, traditions, words, proverbs, dances, myths, costumes, recipes, and so forth  and as long as a critical mass of carriers of these genes and memes, located abroad, survives the cataclysm, all of this richness can continue to exist and flourish elsewhere, and the now-gone physical place can continue to be celebrated in song and story.
As Descartes said, Cogito ergo sum.
Someone seems to be looking at configurations of activated symbols and perceiving their essence, thereby triggering the retrieval of other dormant symbols (which, as we have just seen, can be very large structures  memory packages that store entire romantic sagas, for instance), and round and round it all goes, giving rise to a lively cycle of symbolic activity  a smooth but completely improvised symbolic dance.
By primitive perceiving systems, I mean entities like, for instance, thermostats, knees, sperms, and tadpoles.
Even your beloved feedback loops  heat-seeking missiles, thermostats, refilling toilets, video feedback, domino chains, pool tables flooded with hordes of microscopic magnetic balls.
SL #642: All Im trying to say is that there are basic, primordial experiences out of which larger experiences are built, and that even the primordial ones are radically, qualitatively different from what goes on in simple physical systems like ropes dangling in breezes and floats bobbing in toilets.
They are the atoms of meaning out of which larger structures of meaning are built.
SL #642: It depends on how they are arranged in larger structures.
But despite that blurry spillover that turns the strict city-limits version of You into Greater Metropolitan You, your I is still very localized.
But if you recall, symbols are simply large phenomena made out of nonsymbolic neural activity, so you can shift viewpoint and get rid of the language of symbols entirely, in which case the I disintegrates.
Why dont you simply see two equally good rival views that we can oscillate between as we find appropriate, in somewhat the way that physicists can oscillate between thermodynamics and statistical mechanics when they deal with gases?
And so they give you recipes  such as their droll koans  to try to combat this universal built-in drive to use words.
It all hinges on the existence of stable mappings (in this case, the mapping called the genetic code) and the meanings that come from them.
SL #642: So the I is all too marbelous  too marbelous for words?
Its all too much, and just too very Berry to ever be in Russells Dictionary.
Indeed, Dan calls such carefully crafted fables intuition pumps, and he knows very well whereof he speaks, since he has dreamt up some of the most insight-providing intuition pumps in the field of philosophy of mind.
I have to admit, parenthetically, that every time I see the phrase Cartesian Ego, although my eyes perceive only one g there, some part of me invariably hallucinates another g, and the image of an egg bubbles up in my brain  a Cartesian Eggo, if youll permit  a beautifully formed egg with a pristine white shell protecting a perfectly spherical and infinitely precious yolk at its core.
I say its closer to that answer rather than saying that it is that answer, because Parfits view, like mine in this book, is that these things that seem so black-and white to us actually come in shades of gray  its just that in ordinary circumstances, things are always so close to being pure black or white that any hints of grayness remain hidden from view, not only thanks to the obvious external fact that we all have separate physical brains housed in separate skulls, but also thanks to an extensive web of linguistic and cultural conventions that collectively and subliminally insist that we each are exactly one person (this is the caged-bird metaphor of Chapter 18, and its also the Cartesian Ego notion), and which implicitly discourage us from imagining any kind of blending, overlapping, or sharing of souls.
The term Parfit prefers is psychological continuity, by which he means what I would tend to call psychological similarity.
The Radical Nature of Parfits Views To dismantle unconscious beliefs that are so deeply rooted and that have such a degree of primacy in our worldview is an extremely daunting and bold undertaking, comparable in subtlety and difficulty to what Einstein accomplished in creating special relativity (undermining, through sheer logic, our deepest and most unquestioned intuitions about the nature of time), and what a whole generation of brilliant physicists, with Einstein at their core, collectively accomplished in creating quantum mechanics (undermining our deepest and most unquestioned intuitions about the nature of causality and continuity).
Each one of them converts one of Parfits personality traits into a different personality trait belonging to none other than Napoleon Bonaparte (and I literally mean none other than, as I will shortly explain).
If switch after switch were thrown, converting Parfit more and more into Napoleon, at what stage would he  or rather, at what stage would this slowly morphing person  simply be Napoleon?
As I have already made clear, asking exactly where along the line the switchover would take place makes no sense from Parfits point of view, for what matters is psychological continuity ( i.e., proximity in that quasimathematical space of personalities or brains that I suggested a little while ago), and that is a feature that comes in all shades of gray.
A person can be partly Derek Parfit and partly Napoleon Bonaparte, and drifting from the one to the other as the switches are thrown.
And this doesnt merely mean that this person is becoming more and more like Napoleon Bonaparte  it means that this person really is slowly becoming Bonaparte himself.
In Parfits view, the Cartesian Ego of Napoleon is not indivisible, nor is that of Derek Parfit.
The result is a hybrid person, a tenth or a third or halfway or threequarters of the way between the two ends  whatever proportions one wishes, ranging from Derek Parfit to Deren Parfite to Dereon Parpite to Deleon Parapite to Doleon Paraparte to Daoleon Panaparte to Dapoleon Ponaparte to Napoleon Bonaparte.
And so most people are put into the awkward position of having to say that there would be a particular spot along the wire at which all of a sudden, without warning, at the instant when the slider passes it, the Cartesian Ego of Parfit would poof out of existence, to be replaced by that of Napoleon Bonaparte.
Where only a moment ago we had been dealing with a somewhat personalitymodified Derek Parfit, but still and all a Derek Parfit who genuinely felt Derek Parfits feelings, now we suddenly have a modified Napoleon Bonaparte, and he feels Napoleons feelings, and not Parfits whatsoever!
For example, I begin by imagining that, upon the throwing of Switch #1, my love for Chopin and Bach is replaced by a visceral loathing of their music and that instead, a sudden yet powerful veneration for Beethoven, Bartk, Elvis, and Eminem flowers in my brain.
Now, I come out with you guys every other sentence, and anyone who objects to it I chortlingly deride as a politically correct monkey (as you might imagine, thats just one of the milder epithets I use).
With the next switch, I jettison my lifelong inclination towards vegetarianism and trade it in for a passion for shooting deer and other wild animals  and of course the larger they are, the better.
And lastly, needless to say, after Switch #5 has been thrown, I totally agree with John Searles Chinese Room experiment, and I think that Derek Parfits ideas about personal identity are a complete crock.
You may have noticed that when I discussed Switch #1, I put quotes around the word my when talking about the brain in which a veneration for Ludwig, Bla, Elvis, and Eminem flowers.
After all, everything I suggested in the paragraphs above is the diametric opposite of what I consider core me-ness.
It implicitly suggests, once again, a sharp, black-and-white dichotomy between a set of hypothetical machines that think (such machines would merely think but would have no inner life) and a different set of hypothetical machines who think (these machines would have an inner life, and each one would be a particular someone).
All of these things survive at different levels in many people who, thanks to having interacted with him intimately over many years or decades, constitute his soular corona  his wife, his three children, and his many, many friends.
Even before Jims body physically dies, his soul will have become so foggy and dim that it might as well not exist at all  the soular eclipse will be in full force  and yet despite the eclipse, his soul will still exist, in partial, low-resolution copies, scattered about the globe.
Though terribly reduced, he will be wherever his soular corona is.
The well-known Australian philosopher of mind David Chalmers, which not only is a cherished friend but also is my former doctoral student, has devoted many years to arguing for the provocative idea that there could be both machines that think and also machines who think.
In other words, machine that thinks is an incoherent phrase because of its relative pronoun, and if some day there really are machines that think, then by definition they will be machines who think.
He paints a picture of a world that has two machines identical down to the last nail, transistor, atom, and quark, and these two machines, sitting side by side on an old oaken table in Room 641 of the Center for Research into Consciousness and Cognetics at Pakistania University, are carrying out exactly the same task.
For concreteness sake, lets say both machines are struggling to prove, using informal geometrical insights rather than formal algebraic manipulations, the simple but surprising chordangle theorem of Euclidean geometry, which states that if a point ( A in the figure below) moves along an arc of a circle, then the angle () subtended by a fixed chord (BC) that the point is looking at as it moves along will be constant.
When I say these two universes are indistinguishable, one of the myriad consequences is that Universe Z, just like Universe Q , has a Milky Way galaxy, a star therein called Sol with a nine-planet solar system whose third planet is called Earth, and on Universe Zs Earth there is a Pakistania University with a Center for Research into Consciousness and Cognetics, and in it, good old Room 641.
Sadly, this Dave is an innocent victim of the illusion of consciousness, which is nothing but a trivial by-product of having a deeply entrenched strange loop in its brain, whereas its isomorphic counterpart in Universe Q, using the same words and intonations, is telling the truth, for he truly is conscious!
It seems to have originated in voodoo rites in the Caribbean and to have spread from there to horror films and then to the world of literature.
Fancy 100-hunekerand-higher racecar brains like yours and mine have a lot of self-perception and hence a lot of consciousness, while very primitive wind-up rubber-band brains like those of mosquitoes have essentially none of it, and lastly, middle-level brains, with just a handful of hunekers (like that of a two-year-old, or a pet cat or dog) come with a modicum of it.
They believe we inhabit a world like that of magical realism, in which there are two types of entities: magical entities, which possess lan mental, and ordinary entities, which lack it.
Imagine a philosophical school called liphosophy whose disciples, known as liphosophers, believe in an elusive  in fact, undetectable  and yet terribly important nonphysical quality called Leafpilishness (always with a capital L) and who also believe that there are certain special entities in our universe that are imbued with this happy quality.
What an amazing and profound phenomenon is Leafpilishness! No matter what your opinion is on consciousness, reader, I suspect you would scratch your head at the tenets of liphosophy.
Or to Andromeda galaxy?
In other words, where is the Central Consciousness Bank?
If the recipient is in some way altered, does its allotment (or part of it) revert to the Central Consciousness Bank, or does it just float around forevermore, no longer attached to a physical anchor?
What about people with Alzheimers disease and other forms of dementia  are they still just as Conscious as they always were, until the moment of their death?
when we watch the antics of the humanoid robots R2-D2 and C-3PO in Star Wars.
If viewers of a space-adventure movie were scientifically informed at the movies start that the saga to follow takes place in a universe completely unlike ours  namely, in a universe without a drop of lan mental  would they then watch with utter indifference as some cutelooking robot, rather like R2-D2 or C-3PO (take your pick), got hacked into little tiny pieces by a larger robot?
Their riddle is predicated upon the existence of an Unbridgeable YouMe Chasm  that is, the absolute inaccessibility by one person of any other persons interiority.
In other words, belief in the inverted spectrum is a close cousin to belief in Cartesian Egos  the idea that we are all disjoint islands and that you cant get there from here.)
Its not possible to determine, no matter how fancy are the brain-scanning gadgets that one has access to, whether my brain (or yours) is knurking or glebbing.
Free Willie is just another blue humpback.
HERE and there in this book, alluding to James Hunekers droll warning to small-souled men quoted in Chapter 1, I have somewhat lightheartedly referred to the number of hunekers comprising various human souls, but I have never been specific about the kinds of traits a highhuneker or low-huneker soul would tend to exhibit.
Another clear violation of our dogma is capital punishment, where society collectively chooses to terminate a human life.
Short of capital punishment, there is incarceration, where society treats people with many different levels of dignity or lack thereof, implicitly showing different levels of respect for different-sized souls.
A head of state (or the head of any large corporation) who has a heart attack will receive far better care than a random citizen, not to mention an illegal alien.
Thus most humans willingly participate, directly or indirectly, in the killing of animals of many different species and the eating of their flesh (sometimes even mixing together fragments of the bodies of pigs, cows, and lambs in a single dish).
This means gentle people such as Mohandas Gandhi, Eleanor Roosevelt, Raoul Wallenberg, Jean Moulin, Mother Teresa, Martin Luther King, and Csar Chvez  extraordinary individuals whose deep empathy for those who suffer leads them to devote a large part of their lives to helping others, and to doing so in nonviolent fashions.
Although I seldom attach much weight to the etymologies of words, I was delighted to notice, when preparing a lecture on these ideas a few years ago, that the word magnanimity, which for us is essentially a synonym of generosity, originally meant, in Latin, having a great soul (animus meaning soul).
Another appealing etymology is that of compassion, which comes from Latin roots meaning suffering along with.
Indeed, he commented rather bitterly, Whenever I help an insect in distress, I do so in an attempt to atone for some of the guilt contracted by humanity for its crimes against animals. As is well known, Schweitzers simple but profound guiding principle was what he termed reverence for life.
to go on an adventure of killing birds with slingshots that they had just made together.
Just at that moment, church bells began to ring out, mingling with the song of the birds in the sunshine.
Here we have a classic conflict between peer pressure and ones own inner voices, or as we usually phrase it (and as Schweitzer himself put it), ones conscience.
This may merely be a lexical gap or a confusing semantic blur in these languages (the meaning on a literal level is co-knowledge), but even if thats the case, I nonetheless think of it as offering us an insight that might otherwise never occur to us: that the partial internalization of other creatures interiority (conscience) is what most clearly marks off creatures who have large souls (much consciousness) from creatures that have small souls, and from yet others that have none or next to none.
These flying, buzzing, blood-sucking automata are more like miniature heat-seeking missiles than like soulful beings.
Perhaps this simply boils down to how much one puts into practice the Golden Rule.
For my sixteenth birthday, my mother gave me a record of the first eight preludes and fugues of Book One of J. S. Bachs monumental work, The Well-Tempered Clavier, as played on the piano by Glenn Gould.
Every time I found a new set of preludes and fugues from either volume, the act of putting the needle down in the grooves of the new record and listening to it for the first time was among the most exciting events in my life.
I was naturally filled with gratification when the popularity of my book Gdel, Escher, Bach linked my name in some fashion in the musical community with that of Bach (this was a true honor), and in Bachs 300th birthyear, 1985, I had the pleasure of participating in several tricentennial celebrations, including a tiny one on his exact birthday that I organized in Ann Arbor for the members of a class I was teaching, plus a few friends, the highlight of which was the small firestorm unleashed when we lit all 300 candles on the giant birthday cake I had ordered.
My response would be, What could have more to do with consciousness or souls than merging oneself with the combined spirituality of Albert Schweitzer and J. S. Bach? The other night, in order to refresh my musty memories of Schweitzer playing Bach organ music (which I listened to hundreds of times in my teen-age years and my twenties), I pulled all four of the old vinyl records off my shelf and put them on in succession.
It started to seem rather curious to me that all this mini-samaritanism was happening while I was so immersed in Bachs profound spirituality and Schweitzers pacifistic mentality of reverence for life.
So I would say that those who strike us as self-less are in fact very soul-full  that is, they house many other souls inside their own skulls/brains/minds/souls  and I dont think this sharing of mind-space diminishes their central core but enlarges and enriches it.
As Walt Whitman put it in his poem Song of Myself , I am large, I contain multitudes. All this richness is a consequence of the fact that at some point in the dim past, the generic human brain surpassed a critical threshold of flexibility and became quasi-universal, able to internalize the abstract essences of other human brains.
A tall order, to be sure, but I hope not a tall tale.
Together, you and I have gone through instance after instance of increasingly sophisticated structures having loops, from the ever-darting-off Exploratorium red dot to fine-grained television cameras taking in the screens they fill, then to formulas asserting that they have no PM proof, and winding up with the strange loop that comes about inside the ever-growing repertoire of symbols in each human beings brain.
