As I read the packages, I discovered that some brands had sodium, others didnt.
Some were fat-free, others werent.
There were 116 kinds of skin cream, and 360 types of shampoo, conditioner, gel, and mousse.
Across the aisle were 64 different kinds of barbecue sauce and 175 types of tea bags.
Heading down the homestretch, I encountered 22 types of frozen waffles.
The New Yorker Collection 1999 Roz Chast from cartoonbank.com.
Comparison shopping to get the best price adds still another dimension to the array of choices, so that if you were a truly careful shopper, you could spend the better part of a day just to select a box of crackers, as you worried about price, flavor, freshness, fat, sodium, and calories.
Supermarkets are unusual as repositories for what are called nondurable goods, goods that are quickly used and replenished.
110 different televisions, offering high definition, flat screen, varying screen sizes and features, and various levels of sound quality.
74 different stereo tuners, 55 CD players, 32 tape players, and 50 sets of speakers.
If we make a mistake, we either have to live with it or return it and go through the difficult choice process all over again.
At these prices, choices begin to have serious consequences.
These catalogs spread like a virusonce 14 | The Paradox of Choice youre on the mailing list for one, dozens of others seem to follow.
Opening just one of them, a summer catalog for women, we find  19 different styles of womens T-shirts, each available in 8 different colors,  10 different styles of shorts, each available in 8 colors,  8 different styles of chinos, available in 6 to 8 colors,  7 different styles of jeans, each available in 5 colors,  dozens of different styles of blouses and pants, each available in multiple colors,  9 different styles of thongs, each available in 5 or 6 colors.
And then there are bathing suits15 one-piece suits, and among two-piece suits:  7 different styles of tops, each in about 5 colors, combined with,  5 different styles of bottoms, each in about 5 colors (to give women a total of 875 different make your own two-piece possibilities).
Most liberal arts colleges and universities now embody a view that celebrates freedom of choice above all else, and the modern university is a kind of intellectual shopping mall.
Education was not just about learning a disciplineit was a way of raising citizens with common values and aspirations.
We had some choices among courses that met those requirements, but they were rather narrow.
In some rather prestigious institutions, this shopping-mall view has been carried to an extreme.
So give it your best shot. About twenty years ago, somewhat dismayed that their students no longer shared enough common intellectual experiences, the Harvard faculty revised its general education requirements to form a core curriculum. Students now take at least one course in each of seven different broad areas of inquiry.
Princeton offers its students a choice of 350 courses from which to satisfy its general education requirements.
Even at my small school, Swarthmore College, with only 1,350 students, we offer about 120 courses to meet our version of the general education requirement, from which students must select nine.
And though I have mentioned only extremely selective, private institutions, dont think that the range of choices they offer is peculiar to them.
The traditional values and traditional bodies of knowledge Lets Go Shopping | 17 transmitted from teachers to students in the past were constraining and often myopic.
Until very recently, important ideas reflecting the values, insights, and challenges of people from different traditions and cultures had been systematically excluded from the curriculum.
But this freedom may come at a price.
Now students are required to make choices about education that may affect them for the rest of their lives.
And they are forced to make these choices at a point in their intellectual development when they may lack the resources to make them intelligently.
But what if, with all these choices, we find ourselves in the bind of wanting to watch two shows broadcast in the same time slot?
And all of this is nothing compared to the major revolution in TV watching that is now at our doorstep.
So the TV experience is now the very essence of choice without boundaries.
Americans go to shopping centers about once a week, more often than they go to houses of worship, and Americans now have more shopping centers than high schools.
In a recent survey, 93 percent of teenage girls surveyed said that shopping was their favorite activity.
Mature women also say they like shopping, but working women say that shopping is a hassle, as do Lets Go Shopping | 19 most men.
When asked to rank the pleasure they get from various activities, grocery shopping ranks next to last, and other shopping fifth from the bottom.
Apparently, people are shopping more now but enjoying it less.
Its not so odd, perhaps, that people spend more time shopping than they used to.
If we dont like shopping at the supermarket, for example, we can just get it over with, and buy what we always buy, ignoring the alternatives.
And this, indeed, is the standard line among social scientists who study choice.
A recent series of studies, titled When Choice Is Demotivating, provide the evidence.
Second, we have a tendency to look around at what others are doing and use them as a standard of comparison.
If the person sitting next to me on an airplane is using an extremely light, compact laptop computer with a large, crystal-clear screen, the choices for me as a consumer have just been expanded, whether I want them to be or not.
Third, we may suffer from what economist Fred Hirsch referred to as the tyranny of small decisions. We say to ourselves, Lets go to one more store or Lets look at one more catalog, and not Lets go to all the stores or lets look at all the catalogs. It always seems easy to add just one more item to the array that is already being considered.
And our culture sanctifies freedom of choice so profoundly that the benefits of infinite options seem self-evident.
When experiencing dissatisfaction or hassle on a shopping trip, consumers are likely to blame it on something elsesurly salespeople, traffic jams, high prices, items out of stockanything but the overwhelming array of options.
There are now several books and magazines devoted to what is called the voluntary simplicity movement.
Its core idea is that we have too many choices, too many decisions, too little time to do what is really important.
Unfortunately, Im not sure that people attracted to this movement think about simplicity in the same way I do.
Recently I 22 | The Paradox of Choice opened a magazine called Real Simple to find something of a simplicity credo.
Or to take care of our own wants and needs. Real Simple, it is claimed, offers actionable solutions to simplify your life, eliminate clutter, and help you focus on what you want to do, not what you have to do. Taking care of our own wants and focusing on what we want to do does not strike me as a solution to the problem of too much choice.
It is precisely so that we can, each of us, focus on our own wants that all of these choices emerged in the first place.
That might go a long way toward reducing the choice problem.
We can imagine a point at which the options would be so copious that even the worlds most ardent supporters of freedom of choice would begin to say, enough already. Unfortunately, that point of revulsion seems to recede endlessly into the future.
In the next chapter, well explore some of the newer areas of choice that have been added to complicate our lives.
The question is, does this increased complexity bring with it increased satisfaction?
Much of human progress has involved reducing the time and energy, as well as the number of processes we have to engage in and think about, for each of us to obtain the necessities of life.
We now even face choice among local telephone service providers.
And the advent of cell phones has given us the choice of cell phone service providers, multiplying options yet again.
I get about two solicitations a week from companies that want to help me make my long-distance calls, and we are all assaulted daily with broadcast and print advertising.
I am not suggesting, by the way, that deregulation and competition in the telephone and power industries are bad things.
In some places, the introduction of choice and competition has gone smoothly.
And most notably in California, it has been a disaster.
But even if we assume that the kinks will be worked out eventually and competitive electric-power provision will benefit consumers, the fact remains that its another choice we have to make.
New Choices | 25 In discussing the introduction of electric power competition in New York, Edward A. Smeloff, a utility industry expert, said, In the past we trusted that state regulators who were appointed by our elected officials were watching out for us, which may or may not have been true.
According to a survey conducted by Yankelovich Partners, a majority of people want more control over the details of their lives, but a majority of people also want to simplify their lives.
As evidence of this conflicted desire, it turns out that many people, though happy about the availability of telephone choices or electric choices, dont really make them.
And in Philadelphia, with the recent arrival of electricity competition, only an estimated 15 percent of customers shopped for better deals.
You might think that theres no harm in this, that customers are just making a sensible choice not to worry.
Not too long ago, only one kind of health insurance was available to most people, usually some local version of Blue Cross or a nonprofit health 26 | The Paradox of Choice care provider like Kaiser Permanente.
In the presidential election of 2000, one of the points of contention between George W. Bush and Al Gore concerned the matter of choice in health insurance.
Gore favored adding prescription drug coverage to Medicare.
Senior citizens would not have to gather information, or make decisions.
And not only is the health insurance issue incredibly complicated (I think Ive met only one person in my entire life who fully understands what his insurance covers and what it doesnt New Choices | 27 and what those statements that come from the insurance company really mean), but the stakes are astronomical.
A bad decision by a senior citizen can bring complete financial ruin, leading perhaps to choices between food and medicine, just the situation that prescription drug coverage is intended to prevent.
With defined contribution plans came choice.
What has happened in recent years is that choice among pension plans has exploded.
Just this year, several partners decided that this set of choices was inadequate, so they developed a retirement plan that has 156 28 | The Paradox of Choice options.
If you once had a choice between Fund A and Fund B, and now Fund C and Fund D are added, you can always decide to ignore the new choices.
Funds C and D will appeal to some, and others wont be hurt by ignoring them.
Once again, new choices demand more extensive research and create more individual responsibility for failure.
Responsibility for medical care has landed on the shoulders of patients with a resounding thud.
I dont mean choice of doctors; weve always had that (if we arent among the nations poor), and with managed care, we surely have less of it than we had before.
I mean choice about what the doctors do.
The tenor of medical practice has shifted from one in which the all-knowing, paternalistic doctor tells the patient what must be doneor just does itto one in which the doctor arrays the possibilities before the patient, along with the likely plusses and minuses of each, and the patient makes a choice.
The attitude was well described by physician and New Yorker contributor Atul Gawande: Only a decade ago, doctors made the decisions; patients did what they were told.
Doctors did not consult patients about their desires and priorities, and routinely withheld informationsometimes crucial information, such as what drugs they were on, what treatments they were being given, and what their diagnosis was.
They were regarded as children: too fragile and New Choices | 31 simpleminded to handle the truth, let alone make decisions.
Also, they suffered because sometimes choosing the right course of action was not just a medical decision, but a decision involving other factors in a patients lifethe patients network of family and friends, for example.
And Gawande has no doubt that giving patients more responsibility for what their doctors do has greatly improved the quality of medical care they receive.
But he also suggests that the shift in responsibility has gone too far: The new orthodoxy about patient autonomy has a hard time acknowledging an awkward truth: patients frequently dont want the freedom that weve given them.
That is, theyre glad to have their autonomy respected, but the exercise of that autonomy means being able to relinquish it.
Gawande goes on to describe a family medical emergency in which his own newborn daughter Hunter stopped breathing.
Even if I made what I was sure was the right choice for her, I could not live with the guilt if something went wrong .
Gawande reports that research has shown that patients commonly prefer to have others make their decisions for them.
Though as many as 65 percent of people surveyed say that if they were to get cancer, they would want to choose their own treatment, in fact, among people who do get cancer, only 12 percent actually want to do so.
Kindness of course includes respect for autonomy, but it does not treat autonomy as an inviolable end in itself.
When it comes to medical treatment, patients see choice as both a blessing and a burden.
And the burden falls primarily on women, who are typically the guardians not only of their own health, but that of their husbands and children.
It is an overwhelming task for women, and consumers in general, to be able to sort through the information they find and make decisions, says Amy Allina, program director of the National Womens Health Network.
And what makes it overwhelming is not only that the decision is ours, but that the number of sources of information from which we are to make the decisions has exploded.
Its not just a matter of listening to your doctor lay out the options and making a choice.
We now have encyclopedic lay-peoples guides to health, better health magazines, and, most dramatic of all, the Internet.
And beyond the sources of information about mainstream medical practices to which we can now turn, there is an increasing array of nontraditional practicesherbs, vitamins, diets, acupuncture, copper bracelets, and so on.
The combination of decision autonomy and a proliferation of treatment possibilities places an incredible burden on every person in a high-stakes area of decision making that did not exist twenty years ago.
The latest indication of the shift in responsibility for medical decisions from doctor to patient is the widespread advertising of prescription drugs that exploded onto the scene after various federal restrictions on such ads were lifted in 1997.
Ask yourself what is the point of advertising prescription drugs (antidepressant, antiinflammatory, antiallergy, diet, ulceryou name it) on prime-time television.
Though it is mostly (89 percent) women who avail themselves of these procedures, men do it too.
We think of it like getting your nails done or going to a spa, says a spokesman for the American Society of Plastic Surgeons.
Another says that going under the knife is no different from putting a nice sweater on, or combing your hair, or doing your nails, or having a little tan. In other words, cosmetic surgery is slowly shifting from being a procedure that people gossip about to being a commonplace tool for self-improvement.
To the extent that this is true, fundamental aspects of appearance become a matter of choice.
Today its an achievement, and homeliness is not just misfortune but a failure. T Choosing How to Work HROUGHOUT ITS HIST ORY, THE UNITED STATES HAS TAKEN PRIDE IN the social mobility afforded to its citizens, and justly so.
A degree then opens up a wide variety of employment opportunities.
After people choose a career path, new choices face them.
The New Choices | 35 telecommunications revolution has created enormous flexibility about when and where many people can work.
Should we dial into the office voice-mail system with our cell phone and check for messages while waiting between courses at the restaurant?
And this means that whether or not we work has become a matter of hour-by-hour, minute-by-minute choice.
Here, too, it seems that every day we face a choice.
In an article a few years ago about the increasingly peripatetic American work force, U.S. News and World Report estimated that 17 million Americans would voluntarily leave their jobs in 1999 to take other employment.
The Microsoft ad that asks us Where do you want to go today? is not just about web surfing.
This kind of job mobility offers many opportunities.
But it comes at a price, and the price is the daily burden of gathering information and making decisions.
Even how we dress for work has taken on a new element of choice, and with it, new anxieties.
All of a sudden, the range of wardrobe possibilities was expanded, and a decision-making problem emerged.
A New Yorker piece about this phenomenon identified at least six different kinds of casual: active casual, rugged casual, sporty casual, dressy casual, smart casual, and business casual.
As writer John Seabrook put it, This New Choices | 37 may be the most depressing thing about the casual movement: no clothing is casual anymore. So we got the freedom to make an individual choice about how to dress on a given day, but for many, that choice entailed more complications than it was worth.
Yet, in the course of their courtship, Joseph and Jane had to make a series of tough choices.
Should they have a religious ceremony, and if so, would it be his religion or hers?
With marital decisions settled, they next had to face the dilemma of children.
However, the question of timing led to another series of choices involving ticking biological clocks, the demands of finishing 38 | The Paradox of Choice PhDs, and uncertainty about future employment circumstances.
They also had to resolve the question of religion.
Were they going to give their kids a religious upbringing, and if so, in whose religion?
Next came a series of career-related choices.
In looking for jobs, should they restrict their search to be near his (West Coast) family or her (East Coast) family, or should they ignore geography completely and just look for the best jobs they could find in the same city, wherever it was?
They thought that they had already made the hard decisions when they fell in love and made a mutual commitment.
A range of life choices has been available to Americans for quite some time.
But in the past, the default options were so powerful and dominant that few perceived themselves to be making choices.
Whom we married was a matter of choice, but we knew that we would do it as soon as we could and have children, because that was something all people did.
These days, its hard to figure out what kind of romantic choice would warrant such attention.
Though unorthodox romantic choices are still greeted with opprobrium or much worse in many parts of the world and in some parts of the United States, it seems clear that the general trend is toward ever greater tolerance of romantic diversity.
Even on network televisionhardly the vanguard of social evolutionthere are people who are married, unmarried, remarried, heterosexual and homosexual, childless families and families with lots of kids, New Choices | 39 all trying each week to make us laugh.
Today, all romantic possibilities are on the table; all choices are real.
Which is another explosion of freedom, but which is also another set of choices to occupy our attention and fuel our anxieties.
According to a recent Gallup poll, 96 percent of Americans believe in God, or a universal spirit, and 87 percent claim that religion is at least fairly important in their own lives.
We are unwilling to regard religious teachings as commandments, about which we have no choice, rather than suggestions, about which we are the ultimate arbiters.
We look upon participation in a religious community as an opportunity to choose just the form of community that gives us what we want out of religion.
Religious institutions then become a kind of market for comfort, tranquility, spirituality, and ethical reflection, and we religion consumers shop in that market until we find what we like.
It may seem odd to talk about religious institutions in these kinds of shopping-mall terms, but I think such descriptions reflect what many people want and expect from their religious activities and affil- 40 | The Paradox of Choice iations.
This is not surprising, given the dominance of individual choice and personal satisfaction as values in our culture.
Wolfe conducted in-depth interviews with a wide variety of people scattered throughout the U.S., and what he found was near unanimity that it was up to each person, as an individual, to pick her or his own values and make her or his own moral choices.
For people who have experienced religion more as a source of oppression than of comfort, guidance, and support, freedom of choice in this area is surely a blessing.
They can pick and choose from among the practices and teachings those that seem to suit them best, including, paradoxically, the choice of conservative denominations that are attractive in part because they limit the choices people face in other parts of their lives.
On the positive side, an individual can experience a personal form of participation consistent with his or her lifestyle, values, and goals.
Each person comes into the world with baggage from his New Choices | 41  The New Yorker Collection 2000 Robert Weber from cartoonbank.com.
ancestral pastrace, ethnicity, nationality, religion, social and economic class.
Some of us manage to cast off the religion into which we were born.
As multiracial marriages become more common, the offspring of those marriages display a variety of hues and physical features that make racial 42 | The Paradox of Choice identification from the outside more difficult.
And, as society becomes more tolerant, it permits racial identification from the inside to be more flexible.
The young New York immigrant woman from Mexico sitting in a college class in contemporary literature can ask herself, as class discussion of a novel begins, whether shes going to express her identity as the Latina, the Mexican, the woman, the immigrant, or the teenager as class discussion unfolds.
But as with marriage, choice of identity has been moving from a state in which the default option was extremely powerful and the fact of choice had little psychological reality to a state in which choice is very real and salient.
As with all the issues Ive been discussing in this chapter, this change in the status of personal identity is both good and bad news: good news because it liberates us, and bad news because it burdens us with the responsibility of choice.
N What It Means to Choose OVELIST AND EXISTENTIALIST PHILOSOPHER ALBERT C AMUS POSED the question, Should I kill myself, or have a cup of coffee? His point was that everything in life is choice.
Existence, at least human existence, is defined by the choices people make.
If New Choices | 43 thats true, then what can it mean to suggest, as I have in these first two chapters, that we face more choices and more decisions today than ever before?
Each and every part of this boring morning ritual is a matter of choice.
So even before your eyes are more than half openlong before youve had your first cup of coffeeyouve made a dozen choices or more.
But they dont count, really, as choices.
So though it is logically true that you could have done otherwise, there is little psychological reality to this freedom of choice.
The burden of having every activity be a matter of deliberate and conscious choice would be too much for any of us to bear.
The transformation of choice in modern life is that choice in many facets of life has gone from implicit and often psychologically unreal to explicit and psychologically very real.
So we now face a demand to make choices that is unparalleled in human history.
We probably would be deeply resentful if someone tried to take our freedom of choice away in any part of life that we really cared 44 | The Paradox of Choice about and really knew something about.
If it were up to us to choose whether or not to have choice, we would opt for choice almost every time.
But it is the cumulative effect of these added choices that I think is causing substantial distress.
As I mentioned in Chapter 1, we are trapped in what Fred Hirsch called the tyranny of small decisions. In any given domain, we say a resounding yes to choice, but we never cast a vote on the whole package of choices.
Nonetheless, by voting yes in every particular situation, we are in effect voting yes on the packagewith the consequence that were left feeling barely able to manage.
In the pages that follow, we will begin to look at some of the ways we can ease that burden and, thereby, lessen the stress and dissatisfaction that comes with it.
Later use the consequences of your choice to modify your goals, the importance you assign them, and the way you evaluate future possibilities.
For example, after renting an apartment you might discover that easy access to shopping and public transportation turned out to be 48 | The Paradox of Choice more important, and spaciousness less important, than you thought when you signed the lease.
As the number of options increases, the effort required to make a good decision escalates as well, which is one of the reasons that choice can be transformed from a blessing into a burden.
It is also one of the reasons that we dont always manage the decision-making task effectively.
The welter of information out there in the world notwithstanding, What do I want? is addressed largely through internal dialogue.
But knowing what we want means, in essence, being able to anticipate accurately how one choice or another will make us feel, and that is no simple task.
The way that the meal or the music or the movie makes you feel in the momenteither good or badcould be called experienced utility.
You have to pick a restaurant, a CD, or a movie, and you make these choices based upon how you expect the experiences to make you feel.
So choices are based upon expected utility.
And once you have had experience with particular restaurants, CDs, or movies, future choices will be based upon what you remember about these past experiences, in other words, on their remembered utility.
To say Deciding and Choosing | 49 that we know what we want, therefore, means that these three utilities align, with expected utility being matched by experienced utility, and experienced utility faithfully reflected in remembered utility.
This peak-end rule of Kahnemans is what we use to summarize the experience, and then we rely on that summary later to remind ourselves of how the experience felt.
The summaries in turn influence our decisions about whether to have that experience again, and factors such as the proportion of pleasure to displeasure during the course of the experience or how long the experience lasted, have almost no influence on our memory of it.
Heres another, quite remarkable example of the peak-end rule 50 | The Paradox of Choice in operation.
Men undergoing diagnostic colonoscopy exams were asked to report how they felt moment by moment while having the exam, and how they felt when it was over.
The discrepancy between logic and memory suggests that we dont always know what we want.
Those who were choosing for three weeks had to predict what they would feel like eating two or three weeks from the moment of choice.
People who do their grocery shopping once a week succumb to 52 | The Paradox of Choice the same erroneous prediction.
In a laboratory simulation of this grocery shopping situation, participants were given eight categories of basic foods and asked to imagine doing their shopping for the day and buying one item in each category.
In contrast, another group of people were asked to imagine going shopping to buy three days worth of food, and thus selecting three things in each category.
And yet it is memories of the past and expectations for the future that govern our choices.
In a world of expanding, confusing, and conflicting options, we can see that this difficulty in targeting our goals accuratelystep one on the path to a wise decisionsets us up for disappointment with the choices we actually make.
H Gathering Information O WEVER WELL OR POORLY WE DETERMINE OUR GOALS BEFORE making a decision, having set them, we then go through the task of gathering information to evaluate the options.
To do this, we review our past experience as well as the experience and expertise Deciding and Choosing | 53 of others.
And increasingly, we use the Internet.
But more than anything else, we get information from advertising.
As advertising professor James Twitchell puts it, Ads are what we know about the world around us. So we dont have to do our choosing alone and unaided.
But we need to know that the information is reliable, and we need to have enough time to get through all the information thats available.
On top of that, the advent of cable TV and its many channels has brought with it the infomercial, a show that is an ad masquerading as entertainment.
Even public television now has ads, disguised as public service announcements, at the start and end of almost every show.
Unfortunately, providing consumers with useful decisionmaking information is not the point of all this advertising.
The point 54 | The Paradox of Choice of advertising is to sell brands.
According to James Twitchell, the key insight that has shaped modern advertising came to cigarette manufacturers in the 1930s.
We probably like to think that were too smart to be seduced by such branding, but we arent.
Nonetheless, when products are essentially equivalent, people go with whats familiar, even if its only familiar because they know its name from advertising.
If people want real information, they have to go beyond advertising to disinterested sources such as Consumer Reports.
Its publisher, Consumers Union, is an independent, nonprofit organization whose mission is to help consumers.
It does not allow any of its reports or ratings to be used in advertising, nor does the magazine contain any commercial advertising.
When it was launched about seventy-five years ago, Consumer Reports offered comparisons among things like Deciding and Choosing | 55 Grade A milk and Grade B milk.
Today it offers comparisons among 220 new car models, 250 breakfast cereals, 400 VCRs, 40 household soaps, 500 health insurance policies, 350 mutual funds, and even 35 showerheads.
For every type of product that Consumer Reports evaluates, there are many that it passes over.
The Internet can give us information that is absolutely up-tothe-minute, but as a resource, it is democratic to a faulteveryone with a computer and an Internet hookup can express their opinion, whether they know anything or not.
The avalanche of electronic information we now face is such that in order to solve the problem of choosing from among 200 brands of cereal or 5,000 mutual funds, we must first solve the problem of choosing from 10,000 web sites offering to make us informed consumers.
I just tried it for Prilosec, one of the largest-selling prescription medications in existence, which is heavily advertised by its manufacturer.
And there is good evidence that the absence of filters on the Internet can lead people astray.
The RAND Corporation recently conducted an assessment of the quality of web sites providing medical information and found that with rare exceptions, theyre all doing an equally poor job. Important information was omitted, and sometimes the information presented was misleading or inac- 56 | The Paradox of Choice curate.
Moreover, surveys indicate that these web sites actually influence the health-related decisions of 70 percent of the people who consult them.
E Evaluating the Information VEN IF WE C AN ACCURATELY DETERMINE WHAT WE WANT AND THEN find good information, in a quantity we can handle, do we really know how to analyze, sift, weigh, and evaluate it to arrive at the right conclusions and make the right choices?
You dutifully check out Consumer Reports, which rates Volvo highest for safety and reliability, so you resolve to buy a Volvo.
Consumer Reports makes its judgments about the reliability of cars Deciding and Choosing | 57 by soliciting input from its thousands and thousands of readers.
So when Consumer Reports says that a car is reliable, it is basing its conclusion on the experience of thousands of people with thousands of cars.
Should it undo conclusions based on the thousands of cases assessed by Consumer Reports?
Unfortunately, most people give substantial weight to this kind of anecdotal evidence, perhaps so much so that it will cancel out the positive recommendation found in Consumer Reports.
Kahneman and Tversky discovered and reported on peoples tendency to give undue weight to some types of information in contrast to others.
They called it the availability heuristic.
The availability heuristic works like this: suppose someone asked you a silly question like Whats more common in English, words that begin with the letter t or words that have t as the third letter? How would you answer this question?
The availability heuristic says that we assume that the more available some piece of information is to memory, the more frequently we must have encountered it in the past.
In general, the frequency of experience does affect its availability to memory.
But frequency of experience is not the only thing that affects availability to memory.
Because starting letters of words are much more salient than third letters, they are much more useful as cues for retrieving words from memory.
So its the salience of starting letters that makes t-words come easily to mind, while people mistakenly think its the frequency of starting letters that makes them come easily to mind.
In addition to affecting the ease with which we retrieve information from memory, salience or vividness will influence the weight we give any particular piece of information.
There are many examples of the availability heuristic in operation.
When spouses are asked (separately) a series of questions about whats good and bad about their marriage, each spouse holds him or herself more responsible than his or her partner, for both the good and the bad.
Peoples natural egocentrism makes it much easier to bring their own actions to mind than those of their partner.
Because our own actions are more available to us from memory, we assume they are more frequent.
Now consider the availability heuristic in the context of advertising, whose main objective is to make products appear salient and vivid.
In one study, researchers asked respondents to estimate the number of deaths per year that occur as a result of various diseases, car accidents, natural disasters, electrocutions, and homicidesforty different types of misfortune in all.
The researchers then compared peoples answers to actual death rates, with striking results.
Respondents judged accidents of all types to cause as many deaths as diseases of all types, when in fact disease causes sixteen times more deaths than accidents.
Death by homicide was thought to be as frequent as death from stroke, when in fact eleven times more people die of strokes than from homicides.
In general, dramatic, vivid causes of death (accident, homicide, tornado, flood, fire) were overestimated, whereas more mundane causes of death (diabetes, asthma, stroke, tuberculosis) were underestimated.
The authors of the study 60 | The Paradox of Choice looked at two newspapers, published on opposite sides of the U.S., and they counted the number of stories involving various causes of death.
What they found was that the frequency of newspaper coverage and the respondents estimates of the frequency of death were almost perfectly correlated.
People mistook the pervasiveness of newspaper stories about homicides, accidents, or firesvivid, salient, and easily available to memoryas a sign of the frequency of the events these stories profiled.
This distortion causes us to miscalculate dramatically the various risks we face in life, and thus contributes to some very bad choices.
What often saves us from our faulty decision-making process is that different people experience different vivid or salient events, and thus have different events available to memory.
So I tell you about my vivid memory, and that convinces you to revise your opinion.
As long as we include social interactions in our information gathering, and as long as our sources of information are diverse, we can probably steer clear of the worst pitfalls.
The benefits of multi-individual information assessment is nicely illustrated by a demonstration that financial analyst Paul Johnson has done over the years.
As the number of choices we face continues to escalate and the amount of information we need escalates with it, we may find ourselves increasingly relying on secondhand information rather than on personal experience.
Moreover, as telecommunications becomes ever more global, each of us, no matter where we are, may end up relying on the same secondhand information.
National news sources such as CNN or USA Today tell everyone in the country, and now even the world, the same story, which makes it less likely that an individuals biased understanding of the evidence will be corrected by his friends and neighbors.
This is how inaccurate information can create a bandwagon effect, leading quickly to a broad, but mistaken, consensus.
S Anchoring ENSITIVITY T O AVAILABILITY IS NOT OUR ONLY ACHILLES HEEL when it comes to making informed choices.
One way is to compare the price of one suit to another, which means using the other items as anchors, or standards.
A more finely tuned example of the importance of the context of comparison comes from a study of supermarket shoppers done in the 1970s, shortly after unit-pricing started appearing on the shelves just beneath the various items.
When unit price information appeared on shelf tags, shoppers saved an average of 1 percent on their grocery bills.
In this case, what the shopper gets to see, side by side, is the small, large, and family sizes of the same item along with their respective unit prices.
The multibrand list of unit prices makes it easier for shoppers to do cross-brand comparisons.
And when such comparisons are easy to make, shoppers follow through and act on the information.
Alas, there seems to be little we can do to avoid being influenced by the alternatives that anchor our comparison processes.
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky call this effect framing.
The effects of framing become even more powerful when the stakes are higher: Imagine that you are a physician working in an Asian village, and six hundred people have come down with a lifethreatening disease.
The vast majority of respondents faced with this choice choose treatment A.
Now the overwhelming majority of respondents choose treatment D. They would rather risk losing everyone than settle for the death of four hundred.
It seems to be a fairly general principle that when making choices among alternatives that involve a certain amount of risk or uncertainty, we prefer a small, sure gain to a larger, uncertain one.
If there are six hundred sick people, saving two hundred (choice A in the first problem) means losing four hundred (choice C in the second problem).
A two-thirds chance of saving no one (choice B in the first problem) means a two-thirds chance of losing everyone (choice D in the second problem).
Just as in the matter of discounts and surcharges, it is the framing of the choice that affects our perception of it, and in turn affects what we choose.
From the perspective of the bottom line, they appear the same; both involve a choice between seeing a concert and being $40 poorer or not seeing it and being $20 poorer.
Or it could be part of a getting culture account, in which case it would be one entry among others that might include subscribing to public television, buying certain books and magazines, and the like.
It could be part of a ways to spend a Friday night account, in which case it would join entries like hanging out at a bar, going to a basketball game, or staying home and dozing in front of the television.
They call it prospect theory.
These might be gains or losses of money, gains or losses of status on the job, gains or losses in your golf handicap, and so on.
Deciding and Choosing | 69 To figure out why prospect theory gives us this curve rather than a straight line, lets look at the two halves of the graph separately.
Thus, an objective gain of say $100 may give 10 units of subjective satisfaction, but a gain of $200 wont give 20 units of satisfaction.
As the magnitude of the gain increases, the amount of additional satisfaction people get out of each additional unit decreases.
The shape of this curve conforms to what economists have long talked about as the law of diminishing marginal utility. As the rich get richer, each additional unit of wealth satisfies them less.
With the graph of prospect theory in view, think about this question: would you rather have $100 for sure or have me flip a coin and give you $200 if it comes up heads and nothing if it comes up tails?
The fact that the payoff for the risky choice is double the payoff for the sure thing exactly compensates for the fact that the chances youll get the payoff are halved.
Thus, as Kahneman and Tversky again point out, people embrace riskthey are risk seekingin the domain of potential losses.
The fact is, we all hate to lose, which Kahneman and Tversky refer to as loss aversion.
Or suppose you are one of a large group of participants in a study and for your time and trouble, you are given either a coffee mug or a nice pen.
The two gifts are of roughly equal value and randomly distributedhalf of the people in the room get one, while the other half get the other.
This phenomenon is called the endowment effect.
And, as prospect theory tells us, because losses are more bad than gains are good, the mug or pen with which you have been endowed is worth more to you than it is to a potential trading partner.
The endowment effect helps explain why companies can afford to offer money-back guarantees on their products.
Once people own them, the products are worth more to their owners than the mere cash value, because giving up the products would entail a loss.
One study compared the way in which the endowment effect influences people to make car-buying decisions under two conditions.
So the endowment effect is operating even before people actually close the deal on their new car.
Aversion to losses also leads people to be sensitive to what are called sunk costs. Imagine having a $50 ticket to a basketball game being played an hours drive away.
What matters is whether youll feel better safe and warm at home, watching the game on TV, or slogging through the snow on treacherous roads to see the game in person.
Economist Richard Thaler provides another example of sunk costs that I suspect many people can identify with.
I Information Gathering in a World with Too Many Options N THIS CHAPTER WEVE SEEN SOME OF THE MISTAKES PEOPLE C A N make predicting what they want, gathering information about alternatives, and evaluating that information.
With many decisions, the consequences of error may be trivial a small price to pay for the wealth of choices available to us.
When you put a lot of time and effort into choosing a restaurant or a place to go on vacation or a new item of clothing, you want that effort to be rewarded with a satisfying result.
Thus the growth of options and opportunities for choice has three, related, unfortunate effects.
Deciding and Choosing | 75 Finally, the very wealth of options before us may turn us from choosers into pickers.
A chooser makes decisions in a way that reflects awareness of what a given choice means about him or her as a person.
With a world of choices rushing by like a music video, all a picker can do is grab this or that and hope for the best.
Unfortunately, the proliferation of choice in our lives robs us of the opportunity to decide for ourselves just how important any given decision is.
And the first choice you must make is between the goal of choosing the absolute best and the goal of choosing something that is good enough.
Imagine going shopping for a sweater.
A satisficer has criteria and standards.
She searches until she finds an item that meets those standards, and at that point, she stops.
The key point is that maximizers aspire to achieve that goal.
Thus, they spend a great deal of time and effort on the search, reading labels, checking out consumer magazines, and trying new products.
In the end, they are likely to get less satisfaction out of the exquisite choices they make than will satisficers.
When reality requires maximizers to compromiseto end a search and decide on somethingapprehension about what might have been takes over.
To a maximizer, satisficers appear to be willing to settle for mediocrity, but that is not the case.
I believe that the goal of maximizing is a source of great dissatis- When Only the Best Will Do | 79 faction, that it can make people miserableespecially in a world that insists on providing an overwhelming number of choices, both trivial and not so trivial.
When Nobel Prizewinning economist and psychologist Herbert Simon initially introduced the idea of satisficing in the 1950s, he suggested that when all the costs (in time, money, and anguish) involved in getting information about all the options are factored in, satisficing is, in fact, the maximizing strategy.
The perceptiveness of Simons observation is at the heart of many of the strategies I will offer for fighting back against the tyranny of overwhelming choices.
The more they agreed, the more they were maximizers.
Perhaps surprisingly, there were no differences between men and women.
S C A L E Whenever Im faced with a choice, I try to imagine what all the other possibilities are, even ones that arent present at the moment.
When shopping, I have a hard time finding clothing that I really love.
No matter what I do, I have the highest standards for myself.
Whenever Im faced with a choice, I try to imagine what all the other possibilities are, even ones that arent present at the moment.
When shopping, I have a hard time finding clothing that I really love.
| 83 No matter what I do, I have the highest standards for myself.
Maximizers spend more time than satisficers thinking about roads not traveled. Whole shelves of psychological self-help books testify to the dangers of this shoulda, woulda, coulda thinking.
Not surprisingly, we found that 1.
Maximizers engage in more product comparisons than satisficers, both before and after they make purchasing decisions.
Maximizers take longer than satisficers to decide on a purchase.
Maximizers spend more time than satisficers comparing their purchasing decisions to the decisions of others.
Maximizers are more likely to experience regret after a purchase.
And when the questioning was broadened to include other experiences, we found something much more compelling 84 | The Paradox of Choice EXAMPLE OF A MAXIMIZER  The New Yorker Collection 2000 Leo Cullum from cartoonbank.com.
Maximizers savor positive events less than satisficers and do not cope as well (by their own admission) with negative events.
After something bad happens to them, maximizers sense of well-being takes longer to recover.
| 85 Maximizers tend to brood or ruminate more than satisficers.
T The Price of Maximizing HE PROBLEMS CREATED BY BEING AWASH WITH CHOICE SHOULD BE much worse for maximizers than they are for satisficers.
When you examine an object and its good enough to meet your standards, you look no further; thus, the countless other available choices become irrelevant.
But if youre a maximizer, every option has the potential to snare you into endless tangles of anxiety, regret, and second-guessing.
Does it follow that maximizers are less happy than satisficers?
We tested this idea by having the same people who filled out the Maximization Scale fill out a variety of other questionnaires that have been shown over the years to be reliable indicators of well-being.
One questionnaire measured happiness.
A sample item asked people how much they agreed that in uncertain times, I usually expect the best. Another questionnaire was the Satisfaction with Life Scale.
A sample item asked people how much they agreed that the conditions of my life are excellent. A final questionnaire measured depression, and asked people how sad they felt, how much satisfaction they got out of various activities, how much interest they had in other people, and what they thought of their appearance, among other things.
Our expectation was confirmed: people with high maximization scores experienced less satisfaction with life, were less happy, were less optimistic, and were more depressed than people with low 86 | The Paradox of Choice maximization scores.
In fact, people with extreme maximization scoresscores of 65 or more out of 91had depression scores that placed them in the borderline clinical depression range.
They do not show that being a maximizer causes unhappiness, because correlation does not necessarily indicate cause and effect.
Nonetheless, I believe that being a maximizer does play a causal role in peoples unhappiness, and I believe that learning how to satisfice is an important step not only in coping with a world of choice but in simply enjoying life.
M Maximizing and Regret AXIMIZERS ARE MUCH MORE SUSCEPTIBLE THAN SATISFICERS T O all forms of regret, especially that known as buyers remorse. If youre a satisficer and you choose something thats good enough to meet your standards, you are less likely to care if something better is just around the corner.
If only I had gone to one more store. If only I had read Consumer Reports. If only I had listened to Jacks advice. You can generate if onlys indefinitely, and each one you generate will diminish the satisfaction you get from the choice you actually made.
Its hard to go through life regretting every decision you make because it might not have been the best possible decision.
And its easy to see that if you experience regret on a regular basis, it will rob you of at least some of the satisfaction that your good decisions warrant.
What is even worse is that you can actually experience regret in anticipation of making a decision.
I will have much more to say about regret in Chapter 7, but for now, lets take a look at another scale we developed in conjunction with our Maximization Scale to measure regret.
The higher your score, the more susceptible you are to regret.
Our findings with the Regret Scale have been dramatic.
Almost everyone who scores high on the Maximization Scale also scores high on regret.
Whenever I make a choice, Im curious about what would have happened if I had chosen differently.
If I make a choice and it turns out well, I still feel like something of a failure if I find out that another choice would have turned out better.
Whenever I make a choice, I try to get information about how the other alternatives turned out.
Since maximizers have higher standards than satisficers, one would think that they end up with better things.
Whereas maximizers might do better objectively than satisficers, they tend to do worse subjectively.
Is he frustrated at how much time and work went into buying it?
When economists theorize about how consumers operate in the market, they assume that people seek to maximize their preferences, or their satisfaction.
What becomes clear about satisfaction or preferences as they are experienced in real life is that they are subjective, not objective.
But while this subjective satisfaction scale may work for trivial decisions, when it comes to important life issueseducation, for instanceisnt objective quality all that matters?
Which is not to say that students who are satisfied with bad colleges will get a good education, or that patients who are satisfied with incompetent doctors will not suffer in the end.
But remember, Im not saying that satisficers do not have standards.
Satisficers may have very high standards.
Its just that they allow themselves to be satisfied once experiences meet those standards.
Following Herbert Simons reasoning, some might argue that my description of maximizers is actually a description of people who dont truly understand what it means to maximize. A real maximizer would figure in the costs (in time and money and stress) of gathering and assessing information.
An exhaustive search of the possibilities, which entails enormous information costs, is not the way to maximize ones investment.
The true maximizer would determine just how much information seeking was the amount needed to lead to a very good decision.
The maximizer would figure out when information seeking had reached the point of diminishing returns.
You will not experience the kind of satisfaction with your choices that satisficers will.
W Maximizing and Perfectionism HEN WE GO BEYOND CONSUMPTION AND INT O THE REALMS OF performance, its important to distinguish between what we mean by maximizers and what describes perfectionists. We have given some of the respondents who filled out our Maximization Scale a scale to measure perfectionism, and we have found that, while responses on the two scales are correlated, maximizing and perfectionism are not interchangeable.
Thus perfectionists, like maximizers, seek to achieve the best.
While maximizers and perfectionists both have very high standards, I think that perfectionists have very high standards that they dont When Only the Best Will Do | 91 expect to meet, whereas maximizers have very high standards that they do expect to meet.
Which may explain why we found that those who score high on perfectionism, unlike maximizers, are not depressed, regretful, or unhappy.
Perfectionists may not be as happy with the results of their actions as they should be, but they seem to be happier with the results of their actions than maximizers are with the results of theirs.
I stick to the brands I know and do my best to ignore new choices on the market.
And in my work, while I do adhere to very high standards, I dont expect to attain perfection.
When I go into one of those fancy stores that sells elegantly prepared takeout foods or to a social gathering that offers a buffet that looks like it was prepared for Gourmet magazine, I look at the wide variety of delicious foods, and I want them all.
When I finally make a choice, I think about the items Ive passed up.
I second-guess myself, and I often regret my decision, not because it turns out badly, but because I suspect that a different decision might have turned out better.
In restaurants, I have difficulty ordering, and then I look at food being brought out to other diners, and not infrequently conclude that they ordered more wisely than I did.
All of which clearly diminishes the satisfaction I get from the choices I actually make.
The truth is that maximizing and satisficing orientations tend to be domain specific. Nobody is a maximizer in every decision, and probably everybody is in some.
Perhaps what distinguishes maximizers from satisficers is the range and number of decisions in which an individual operates as one or the other.
This is good news, because what it means is that most of us have the capacity to be satisficers.
The task, then, for someone who feels overwhelmed by choices, is to apply the satisficing strategy more often, letting go of the expectation that the best is attainable.
In fact, the more options there are, the more likely When Only the Best Will Do | 93 it is that the satisficer will find one that meets his or her standards.
When the older girl entered adolescence, my friend and his wife experienced the usual parent-versus-adolescent struggles for control.
Each shopping trip was accompanied by anguish about whether purchasing this or that item was really the best thing to do with her money.
Would she regret having purchased this item two months later, when the seasons and styles changed?
Giving her all this freedom was not doing her an unalloyed favor.
I suspect that 94 | The Paradox of Choice she isnt sorry that she had this freedom to make her own decisions, but her clothing liberation provided her with much worry and little joy.
The first explanation is that many maximizers may not be aware of this tendency in themselves.
They might be aware that they have trouble making decisions and that they fear they will regret decisions and that they often derive little lasting satisfaction from the decisions they have made, but all with no conscious awareness of what is at the root of the problem.
The second explanation is our concern with status.
People have undoubtedly cared about status for as long as they have lived in groups, but status concern has taken on a new form in our time.
In an era of global telecommunications and global awareness, only the best assures success in a competition against everybody else.
With increased affluence, increased materialism, modern marketing techniques, and a stunning amount of choice thrown into the mix, it seems inevitable that concern for status would explode into a kind of arms race of exquisiteness.
Theres another dimension to the modern concern for status, identified thirty years ago by economist Fred Hirsch.
He wrote about goods that were inherently scarce or whose value depended in part on their scarcity.
And if youre in competition for inherently scarce goods, good enough is never good enough; only the bestonly maximizationwill do.
So it is possible that some people are aware of the negative side of being maximizers, but that they feel compelled by circumstance to be maximizers nonetheless.
HAT I WANT T O EXPLORE FINALLY IS WHETHER THE PROLIFERA - tion of choices might make someone a maximizer.
As I indicated earlier, prior to that bewildering shopping trip, I didnt care very much about which jeans I bought.
My standards for buying jeans had been alteredforever.
Throughout this chapter, I have been talking about maximizing and the number of options people face as if the two were indepen- 96 | The Paradox of Choice dent of each other.
The world offers a wide range of options, and something (presently unknown) creates maximizers, and then the two combine to make people unhappy with their decisions.
But it is certainly possible that choice and maximizing are not independent of each other.
It is possible that a wide array of options can turn people into maximizers.
If this is true, then the proliferation of options not only makes people who are maximizers miserable, but it may also make people who are satisficers into maximizers.
At present, the potential causal role that the availability of choice has in making people into maximizers is pure speculation.
If the speculation is correct, we ought to find that in cultures in which choice is less ubiquitous and extensive than it is in the U.S., there should be fewer maximizers.
Studies comparing the well-being of people living in different cultures have shown that substantial differences between cultures in the consumption opportunities they make available to people have very small effects on peoples satisfaction with their lives.
Why We Suffer Part III CHAPTER FIVE Choice and Happiness  F REEDOM AND AU T ONOMY ARE CRITIC AL T O OUR WELL-BEING, AND choice is critical to freedom and autonomy.
Nonetheless, though modern Americans have more choice than any group of people ever has before, and thus, presumably, more freedom and autonomy, we dont seem to be benefiting from it psychologically.
Whereas many needs are universal (food, shelter, medical care, social support, education, and so on), much of what we need to flourish is highly individualized.
Any time choice is restricted in some way, there is bound to be someone, somewhere, who is deprived of the opportunity to pursue something of personal value.
Over two centuries ago Adam Smith observed that individual freedom of choice ensures the most efficient production and distribution of societys goods.
As important as the instrumental value of choice may be, choice reflects another value that might be even more important.
Freedom to choose has what might be called expressive value.
Im a serious person, or Im a sensible person, or Im rich. Or maybe even I wear what I want and I dont care what you think about it. To express yourself, you need an adequate range of choices.
The food we eat, the cars we drive, the houses we live in, the music we listen to, the books we read, the hobbies we pursue, the charities we contribute to, the demonstrations we attendeach of these choices has an expressive function, regardless of its practical importance.
And some choices may have only an expressive function.
Take voting, for example.
Many voters understand that, the 2000 presidential election notwithstanding, a single vote almost never has instrumental significance.
Voters take citizenship seriously, they do their duty, and they do not take political freedom for granted.
An illustration of the expressive function of voting is the story of two American political scientists who were in Europe on election day.
Every choice we make is a testament to our autonomy, to our sense of self-determination.
Almost every social, moral, or political philosopher in the Western tradition since Plato has placed a premium on such autonomy.
And each new expansion of choice gives us another opportunity to assert our autonomy, and thus display our character.
But choices have expressive functions only to the extent that we can make them freely.
till death us do part. If you have no way to get out of a marriage, marital commitment is not a statement about you; its a statement about society.
If divorce is legal, but the social and religious sanctions against it are so powerful that anyone who leaves a marriage becomes a pariah, your marital commitment again says more about society than it does about you.
But if you live in a society that is almost completely permissive about divorce, honoring your marital vows does reflect on you.
The value of autonomy is built into the fabric of our legal and moral system.
Theres not a single aspect of our collective 102 | The Paradox of Choice social life that would be recognizable if we abandoned our commitment to autonomy.
But beyond our political, moral, and social reliance on the idea of autonomy, we now know that it also has a profound influence on our psychological well-being.
Seligman and his colleagues suggested that the animals in this third group had learned from being exposed to inescapable shocks that nothing they did made a difference; that they were essentially helpless when it came to controlling their fate.
Like the second group, they had also transferred to the hurdle-jumping situation lessons they had learned beforein this case, learned helplessness.
Seligmans discovery of learned helplessness has had a monumental impact in many different areas of psychology.
Hundreds of studies leave no doubt that we can learn that we dont have control.
It can affect future ability to detect that you do have control in new situations.
It can suppress the activity of the bodys immune system, thereby making helpless organisms vulnerable to a wide variety of diseases.
And it can, under the right circumstances, lead to profound, clinical depression.
So it is not an exaggeration to say that our most fundamental sense of well-being crucially depends on our having the ability to exert control over our environment and recognizing that we do.
Now think about the relation between helplessness and choice.
If we have choices in a particular situation, then we should be able to exert control over that situation, and thus we should be protected from helplessness.
Only in situations where there is no choice should vulnerability to helplessness appear.
Quite apart from the instrumental benefits of choicethat it enables people to get what they wantand the expressive benefits of choicethat it enables people to say who they arechoice enables people to be actively and effectively engaged in the world, with profound psychological benefits.
At first glance, this may suggest that opportunities for choice should be expanded wherever possible.
104 | The Paradox of Choice The first is that, as the experience of choice and control gets broader and deeper, expectations about choice and control may rise to match that experience.
As one barrier to autonomy after another gets knocked down, those that remain are, perhaps, more disturbing.
Like the mechanical rabbit at the dog-racing track that speeds along just ahead of the dogs no matter how fast they run, aspirations and expectations about control speed ahead of their realization, no matter how liberating the realization becomes.
The second explanation is simply that more choice may not always mean more control.
Instead of feeling in control, we feel unable to cope.
Remember the survey that asked people whether they would want to choose their mode of treatment if they got cancer?
But when the same question was asked of people who actually had cancer, the overwhelming majority said no.
In making a choice that could mean the difference between life and death, figuring out which choice to make becomes a grave burden.
To avoid the escalation of such burdens, we must learn to be selective in exercising our choices.
We must decide, individually, when choice really matters and focus our energies there, even if it means letting many other opportunities pass us by.
The choice of when to be a chooser may be the most important choice we have to make.
Choice and Happiness R | 105 Measuring Happiness E S E A RC H E R S A L L OV E R T H E WO R L D H AV E B E E N T RY I N G TO M E A S U R E happiness for decades, partly to determine what makes people happy and partly to gauge social progress.
Typically, studies of happiness take the form of questionnaires, and measures of happinessor subjective well-being, as it is often calledare derived from answers to lists of questions.
(Courtesy of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates) This is the Satisfaction with Life Scale.
In recent years, researchers have combined these questionnaire responses with other measures of happiness.
Results using this technique have shown a rather consistent relation between respondents answers to questions in the moment and their answers to questions on surveys like the Satisfaction with Life Scale.
So there is some reason for confidence that studies using surveys really are telling us how people feel about their lives.
And one of the things these surveys tell us is that, not surprisingly, people in rich countries are happier than people in poor countries.
But what these surveys also reveal is that money doesnt matter as much as you might think.
Once a societys level of per capita wealth crosses a threshold from poverty to adequate subsistence, further increases in national wealth have almost no effect on happiness.
You find as many happy people in Poland as in Japan, for example, even though the average Japanese is almost ten times richer than the average Pole.
And Poles are much happier than Hungarians (and Icelandics much happier than Americans) despite similar levels of wealth.
If, instead of looking at happiness across nations at a given time, we look within a nation at different times, we find the same story.
The percentage of homes with air-conditioning has Choice and Happiness | 107 increased from 15 percent to 73 percent.
Even more striking, in Japan, per capita wealth has increased by a factor of five in the last forty years, again with no measurable increase in the level of individual happiness.
What seems to be the most important factor in providing happiness is close social relations.
Being connected to others seems to be much more important to subjective well-being than being rich.
Miserable people are surely less likely than happy people to have close friends, devoted family, and enduring marriages.
So it is at least possible that happiness comes first and close relations come second.
What seems likely to me is that the causality works both ways: happy people attract others to them, and being with others makes people happy.
In the context of this discussion of choice and autonomy, it is also important to note that, in many ways, social ties actually decrease freedom, choice, and autonomy.
Marriage, for example, is a commitment to a particular other person that curtails freedom of choice of sexual and even emotional partners.
And serious friendship imposes a lasting hold on you.
To be someones friend is to undertake weighty responsibilities and obligations that at times may limit your own freedom.
The same is true, obviously, of family.
So, counterintuitive as it may 108 | The Paradox of Choice MONEY AND HAPPINESS  The New Yorker Collection 2000 David Sipress from cartoonbank.com.
appear, what seems to contribute most to happiness binds us rather than liberates us.
How can this notion be reconciled with the popular belief that freedom of choice leads to fulfillment?
The other, by political scientist Robert Lane, is called The Loss of Happiness in Market Democracies.
Both books point out how the growth of material affluence has not brought with it an increase in subjective well-being.
As Myers graphically puts it, since 1960 in the U.S., the divorce rate has doubled, the teen suicide rate has tripled, the recorded violent crime rate has quadrupled, the prison population has quintupled, the percentage of babies born to unmarried parents has sextupled, and the rate of cohabitation without marriage (which actually is a pretty good predictor of eventual divorce) has increased sevenfold.
And as Lane points out, the rate of serious clinical depression has more than tripled over the last two generations, and increased by perhaps a factor of ten from 1900 to 2000.
All of which contributes to, and is exacerbated by, a massive increase in levels of stress, stress that in turn contributes to hypertension and heart disease, lowers immune responsiveness, and causes anxiety and dissatisfaction.
But, as Lane put it very simply, in addition to the other factors contributing to our modern malaise: There are too many life choices .
The rise in the frequency of depression is especially telling.
While I will discuss depression at greater length in Chapter 10, I want to point out an important paradox.
Earlier in the chapter I discussed Martin Seligmans work on learned helplessness and its relation to depression.
That work strongly suggests that the more control people have, the less helpless, and thus the less depressed, they will be.
I have also suggested that in modern societies we have more choice, and thus more control, than people have ever had before.
Put these two pieces of information together, and it might lead you to expect that depression is going the way of polio, with 110 | The Paradox of Choice autonomy and choice as the psychological vaccines.
Instead, we are experiencing depression in epidemic numbers.
Is Seligmans theory about helplessness and depression wrong?
Then can it be that freedom of choice is not all its cracked up to be?
Lane writes that we are paying for increased affluence and increased freedom with a substantial decrease in the quality and quantity of social relations.
We earn more and spend more, but we spend less time with others.
And once again, this phenomenon adds to our burden of choice.
and actively cultivate their own family connections. In other words, our social fabric is no longer a birthright but has become a series of deliberate and demanding choices.
To form a real friendship with someone, or to develop a romantic attachment, we have to get to know the other person quite deeply.
When family, friends, fellow congregants need us, we have to be there.
And the needs of friends and family dont arise on a convenient schedule, to be penciled into our day planner or Palm Pilot.
Who has the flexibility and breathing room in lifes regularly scheduled activities to be there when needed without paying a heavy price in stress and distraction?
Again, it is my contention that a major contributor to this time burden is the vastly greater number of choices we find ourselves preparing for, making, reevaluating, and perhaps regretting.
Stick with your Internet provider or go with a new direct service line?
Change your health insurance?
Time spent dealing with choice is time taken away from being a good friend, a good spouse, a good parent, and a good congregant.
Once people make commitments to others, options close.
They can exit the situation, or they can protest and give voice to their concerns.
In the marketplace, exit is the characteristic response to dissatisfaction.
One of the principal virtues of free-market choice is that it gives people the opportunity to express their displeasure by exit.
We dont dismiss lovers, friends, or communities the way we dismiss restaurants, cereals, or vacation spots.
Instead, we usually give voice to our displeasure, hoping to influence our lover, friend, or community.
Most people find it extremely challenging to balance the conflicting impulses of freedom of choice on the one hand and loyalty and commitment on the other.
Those who value freedom of choice and movement will tend to stay away from entangling relationships; those who value stability and loyalty will seek them.
If we fail in establishing exactly the kinds of social relations we want, we will feel that we have only ourselves to blame.
With clearer rules of the game for us to live byconstraints that specify how much of life each of us should devote to ourselves and what our obligations to family, friends, and community should bemuch of the onus for making these decisions would be lifted.
But the price of accepting constraints imposed by social institutions is a restriction on individual freedom.
A society that allows us to answer this question individually has already given us an answer, for by giving people the choice, it has opted for freedom.
But if unrestricted freedom can impede the individuals pursuit of what he or she values most, then it may be that some restrictions make everyone better off.
And if constraint sometimes affords a kind of liberation while freedom affords a kind of enslavement, then people would be wise to seek out some measure of appropriate constraint.
These are what Cass Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit call second-order decisions.
Having the discipline to live by the rules you make for yourself is, of course, another matter, but one things for sure: following rules eliminates troublesome choices in your daily life, each time you get into a car or each time you go to a cocktail party.
Presumptions are like the default settings on computer applications.
Standards are even less rigorous than rules or presumptions.
Then, when we have to make a choice, we need only investigate the options within category number one.
This is especially true if we combine standards with routines, or habits.
Deciding that once we find something that meets our standards well stick with it essentially takes away that area of decision making.
Friendships often sustain themselves on a combination of standards and routines.
We are drawn to people who meet our standards (of intelligence, kindness, character, loyalty, wit), and then we stick with them.
We dont make a choice, every day, about whether to maintain the friendship; we just do.
We dont ask ourselves whether we would get more out of a friendship with Mary than we do out of our friendship with Jane.
There are countless Marys out there, and if we did ask ourselves this kind of question, wed be continually choosing whether to maintain our friendships.
So by using rules, presumptions, standards, and routines to constrain ourselves and limit the decisions we face, we can make life more manageable, which gives us more time to devote ourselves to other people and to the decisions that we cant or dont want to avoid.
At the turn of the twentieth century, biologist Jacob von Uexkull, observing how evolution shaped organisms so that their Choice and Happiness | 115 perceptual and behavioral abilities were precisely attuned to their survival, remarked that security is more important than wealth. In other words, a squirrel in the wild doesnt have the wealth of experience and of choice that people do when they decide to take a walk in the forest.
What the squirrel does have is the security that it will notice what matters most and know how to do what it needs to do to survive, because biology supplies the needed constraints on choice.
G Wanting and Liking IVEN THE HIGH VALUE WE PLACE ON AU T ONOMY AND FREEDOM OF choice, you would think that having it would make us happier.
But powerful evidence has recently appeared that wanting and liking are served by fundamentally different brain systems systems that often do, but certainly need not, work together.
Drug addicts desperately want their drugs (such is the nature of addiction), even after they reach a point in their addiction where ingesting the drugs provides very little pleasure.
And stimulation of certain areas of the brain can get rats to want food, though they show no evidence that they enjoy it even as they eat it.
So wanting and liking can, under some circumstances, be dissociated, just 116 | The Paradox of Choice as there is often a disconnect between our anticipated preferences and the options we actually choose.
Remember that 65 percent of people who didnt have cancer said that if they got it, they would prefer to choose their treatment.
Of those who actually had cancer, 88 percent said they would prefer not to choose.
Apparently we always think we want choice, but when we actually get it, we may not like it.
Meanwhile, the need to chose in ever more aspects of life causes us more distress than we realize.
She is considering two very different possibilities: touring in northern California or a week at a beach house on Cape Cod.
She loves long stretches of isolated coastline, but she also likes good food and a bustling nightlife, peoplewatching and window-shopping.
Angela has to assess the impor- tance of these various features of vacation destinations.
Then, she has to see how northern California and Cape Cod stack up.
But more likely, shell 118 | The Paradox of Choice discover that each option has strengths that the other one lacks, so shell end up having to make trade-offs.
Nonetheless, if she lists the things that matter to her, determines how much they matter, and evaluates how each possibility measures up, Angela will be able to make a choice.
There are mountains for hiking, lakes for swimming, an arts festival, good restaurants, warm dry days, and crisp, cool nights.
Spending time with friends is something she didnt consider when choosing between California and Cape Cod.
If being with friends is nice, being with family is nicer.
Maybe theres someplace close to where her kids live thats beautiful, has nice restaurants, good weather, and things to do at night.
Shes simply going to have to make some trade-offs.
Another job prospect turns up in a location that is close to family and old friends, something Michael had also not considered.
In making a job choice, Michael will have to ask himself several hard questions.
Is he willing to trade off both for being near his family?
PA RT OF THE DOWNSIDE of abundant choice is that each new option adds to the list of trade-offs, and trade-offs have psychological consequences.
The necessity of making trade-offs alters how we feel about the decisions we face; more important, it affects the level of satisfaction we experience from the decisions we ultimately make.
An opportunity cost of vacationing on the beach in Cape Cod is great restaurants in California.
An opportunity cost of taking a job near your romantic partner is that you wont be near your family.
Every choice we make has opportunity costs associated with it.
Failing to think about opportunity costs can lead people astray.
Some options are more realistic than others, and the wisdom of each depends on your life goals and your timing.
As I write this, real estate certainly seems a better choice than stocks, but in 1996, with the market about to soar, $50,000 in the right tech stocks, with the right exit strategy, might have made a fortune.
The point is, even decisions that appear to be no-brainers carry the hidden costs of the options declined.
Thinking about opportunity costs may not change the decision you make, but it will give you a more realistic assessment of the full implications of that decision.
According to standard economic assumptions, the only opportunity costs that should figure into a decision are the ones associated with the next-best alternative.
According to economists, thats where your cost accounting should stop.
Which is also excellent advice for managing our own psychological response to choice.
Dinner at home with friends may be the best way to experience intimacy.
Even though there may be a single, second-best option overall, each of the options you reject has some very desirable feature on which it beats its competition.
If we assume that opportunity costs take away from the overall desirability of the most-preferred option and that we will feel the opportunity costs associated with many of the options we reject, then the more alternatives there are from which to choose, the greater our experience of the opportunity costs will be.
And the greater our experience of the opportunity costs, the less satisfaction we will derive from our chosen alternative.
Why cant there be a job that offers a good salary, opportunities for advancement, a friendly work environment, an interesting location that has a job for my partner, and proximity to my family?
Why cant there be a vacation where I get the beach and great restaurants, shops, and tourist sights?
The existence of multiple alternatives makes it easy for us to imagine alternatives that dont existalternatives that combine Missed Opportunities A COUPLE DISCOVERS COSTS OF THE H AV I N G | 123 OPPORTUNITY CHILDREN  The New Yorker Collection 2000 David Sipress from cartoonbank.com.
So, once again, a greater variety of choices actually makes us feel worse.
Ultimately, the quality of choices that matters to people is the subjective experience that the choices afford.
The lists of alternatives are constructed so that in choosing one option, the participants will have to make trade-offs.
If someone were to say, for example, that Car B was only worth $10,000, they would clearly be placing great value on the extra safety afforded by Car A.
If instead they were to say that Car B was worth $22,000, they would be placing much less value on the Missed Opportunities | 125 extra safety afforded by Car A.
They were presented with a choice between Car A, safety rating 8 and price of $25,000, and Car B, safety rating 6, and the price that they had previously said made the two cars equally attractive.
This choice was clearly different from the way people reacted to the task in which they had to establish a price that would make the two cars equivalent.
Rather, when the time came to make the choice, they were simply unwilling to live by the price on safety that they had already established.
So the researchers concluded that being forced to confront trade-offs in making decisions makes people unhappy and indecisive.
Participants in these studies showed the pattern of reluctance to make trade-offs whether the stakes were high or low.
And as the available alternatives increase, the extent to which choices will require trade-offs will increase as well.
W Avoiding Decisions HAT, THEN, DO PEOPLE DO IF VIRTUALLY ALL DECISIONS INVOLVE trade-offs and people resist making them?
Imagine being in the market for a new music system and seeing a sign in a store window announcing a one-day clearance sale on CD players.
By creating the conflict, this second option makes it harder, not easier to make a choice.
Consumers need or want reasons to justify choices, as we see in a third hypothetical situation.
Not surprisingly, almost no one chooses the Aiwa.
Surprisingly, however, 73 percent go with the Sony, as opposed to 66 percent when it was offered by itself.
Perhaps seeing the inferior Aiwa bolsters peoples confidence that the Sony is really a good deal, though in a market with dozens of brands and models of CD players available, the presence of this second alternative doesnt really prove much.
Even if inferior in every way, the second alternative provides an anchor or comparison that bolsters a buyers reasons for choosing the first one (see Chapter 3).
Difficult trade-offs make it difficult to justify decisions, so decisions are deferred; easy trade-offs make it easy to justify decisions.
In a second condition, participants were offered the $1.50 or a choice between that same metal pen and two lessexpensive felt-tipped pens (also worth about $2).
It is 128 | The Paradox of Choice hard to imagine why adding the pair of cheaper pens to the mix should do anything to alter the value of the good pen in comparison with $1.50.
So more people, not fewer, ought to be going with the pens rather than the cash when they have a choice.
Other doctors were presented with a choice between two new medications or referral to a specialist.
Based on these studies, and others like them, researchers concluded that when people are presented with options involving trade-offs that create conflict, all choices begin to look unappealing.
People find decision making that involves trade-offs so unpleasant that they will clutch at almost anything to help them decide.
Consider this scenario from another study: Missed Opportunities | 129 Imagine that you serve on the jury of an only-child, solecustody case following a relatively messy divorce.
Another group of respondents was given exactly the same information as the first, but asked a slightly different question: Which parent would you deny sole custody of the child?
With the judgment framed in this negative language, the percentage of those voting for the child to go to B dropped from 64 percent to 55 percent.
Difficult choices like this one set people off on a chase for reasons to justify their decisions.
If youre looking only at the negatives, then you dont have to worry about trade-offs with the positives.
A digital camera will allow you to manipulate the images you capture and send them easily to friends and family, both of which attract you.
We saw in Chapter 3 that people tend to display loss aversion.
What that means is that when the mountain bike and the digital camera are compared, each will suffer from the comparison.
Once again, this suggests that whenever we are forced to make decisions involving trade-offs, we will feel less good about the option we choose than we would have if the alternatives hadnt been there.
In almost every case, respondents placed a higher value on the magazine or the video when they were evaluating it in isolation than when they were evaluating it as part of a cluster.
When magazines are evaluated as part of a group, each of them will both gain and lose from the comparisons.
And because the losses will loom larger than the gains, the net result of the comparison will be negative.
Bottom linethe options we consider usually suffer from comparison with other options.
J Trade-offs: Emotional Unpleasantness Makes for Bad Decisions UST ABOUT EVERYONE SEEMS T O APPRECIATE THAT THINKING about trade-offs makes for better decisions.
We want our doctors to be weighing trade-offs before making treatment recommendations.
We want our investment advisers carefully considering trade-offs before making investment recommendations.
We want Consumer Reports to evaluate trade-offs before making purchasing recommendations.
We just dont want to have to evaluate trade-offs ourselves.
And we dont want to do it because it is emotionally unpleasant to go through the process of thinking about opportunity costs and the losses they imply.
The emotional cost of potential trade-offs does more than just diminish our sense of satisfaction with a decision.
As the stakes of decisions involving trade-offs rise, emotions become more powerful, and our decision making can be severely impaired.
Researchers have known for years about the harmful effects of negative emotion on thinking and decision making.
We consider more possibilities; were open to considerations that would otherwise not occur to us; we see subtle connections between pieces of information that we might otherwise miss.
Opportunity Costs, Trade-offs, and Exploding Options W EVE SEEN THAT AS THE NUMBER OF OPTIONS UNDER CONSIDERA - tion goes up and the attractive features associated with the rejected alternatives accumulate, the satisfaction derived from the chosen alternative will go down.
Because we dont put rejected options out of our minds, we Missed Opportunities | 133 experience the disappointment of having our satisfaction with decisions diluted by all the options we considered but did not choose.
In light of these cumulative, negative effects of opportunity costs, it is tempting to recommend that in making decisions, we ignore opportunity costs altogether.
If opportunity costs complicate the decision and they make us miserable, why think about them?
And once we start considering alternatives, the matter of opportunity costs is bound to come up.
Choosing almost always involves giving up something else of value.
So thinking about opportunity costs is probably an essential part of wise decision making.
The trick is to limit the set of possibilities so that the opportunity costs dont add up to make all the alternatives unattractive.
Appreciating the cumulative burden posed by opportunity costs can help us better understand the findings of the study mentioned in Chapter 1 in which two sets of participants encountered a variety of different flavors of a brand of high-quality jam at a sample table set up in a gourmet food store.
Some people were presented with six different samples on the table, while others saw twenty-four.
But when there are twenty-four jams to consider, it is easy to imagine that many of them will have attractive features: novelty, sweetness, texture, color, and who knows what else.
It may still be the one that wins the competition, but its attractiveness score is no longer high enough to warrant a purchase.
Similarly, with regard to essay topics, some may be attractive because students already know a lot about them, others because they are provocative, others because they have personal relevance, and still others because they relate to ideas students are discussing in another course.
But the potential attractiveness of each will subtract from the attractiveness of all of the others.
Or perhaps the negative emotion aroused by having had to consider trade-offs will narrow his thinking.
Some years ago, when my wife and I made a trip to Paris for a long weekend, I had an experience that I couldnt understand until I began to write this chapter.
We took a leisurely stroll along one of the citys magnificent boulevards and looked for a place to eat a muchanticipated lunch.
But how could we be in Paris and just walk into the first restaurant we encountered?
The restaurants we encountered seemed less and less attractive.
In fact what was happening was the buildup of opportunity costs.
As I encountered one attractive alternative after another, each new alternative just reduced the potential pleasure I would feel after I made my choice.
Clearly, the cumulative opportunity cost of adding options to ones choice set can reduce satisfaction.
This created a problem for me, especially when I had to be the one to choose a movie that my family or friends would watch together.
Choosing a movie for others is not my favorite activity (youll remember, perhaps, that its one of the questions on the Maximization Scale that I showed you in Chapter 4).
So, back in Swarthmore, nobody had high expectations, and nobody seriously faulted the chooser for whatever he came home with.
The blame for a bad choice will rest squarely with me, and the stakes involved in my video choice have escalated.
We feel compelled to articulateat least to our- selveswhy we made a particular choice.
This need to search for reasons seems useful; it ought to improve the quality of our choices.
It may seem self-evident that every choice requires a reason, but several recent studies suggest that this simple and straightforward model of decision making isnt always accurate.
After the tasting, the experimenters compared the participants rankings to those of experts that had been published in Consumer Reports.
In another study, college students were asked to evaluate five posters of the sort that often decorate dorm rooms.
Pretesting with other students had determined that most people preferred the van Gogh and the Monet to the kitschy posters of cartoons and animals.
The others werent given this instruction.
The students then rated each of the posters.
In addition, when the session was over, the experimenter told them that they could take one of the posters home.
Copies of each poster were sitting rolled up in bins, blank side facing out, so that the students didnt have to worry about their taste being judged by others.
The first interesting result of this study was that people asked to write down their thoughts preferred the funny posters to those featuring fine art.
At the moment of choice, these explicit, verbalized reasons weigh heavily in the decision.
As the salience of the verbalized reasons fades, so, too, does peoples satisfaction with the decision they made.
In a final example, college couples were recruited to participate in a study of the effects of romantic relationships on the college experience.
For some, attitudes became more positive; for others, they became more negative.
In discussing these studies, I am not suggesting that we will always, or even frequently, be better off going with our gut when making choices.
My concern, given the research on trade-offs and opportunity costs, is that as the number of options goes up, the need to provide justifications for decisions also increases.
While students at many colleges are happy to discover a subject to study that not only do they enjoy but that will enable them to make a living, many of the students I teach have multiple interests and capabilities.
Instead, they agonize: Between making money and doing something of lasting social value.
With a decision as important as this, they struggle to find the reasons that make one choice stand out above all the others.
In addition, because of the flexibility that now characterizes relations among family, friends, and lovers, my students cant even use obligations to other people as a way to limit their possibilities.
And each possibility they consider has its attractive features, so that the opportunity costs associated with those attractive options keep mounting up, making the whole decision-making process decidedly unattractive.
With fewer options and more constraints, many trade-offs would be eliminated, and there would be less self-doubt, less of an effort to justify decisions, more satisfaction, and less second-guessing of the decisions once made.
142 | The Paradox of Choice The anguish and inertia caused by having too many choices was described in the book Quarterlife Crisis: The Unique Challenges of Life in Your Twenties.
Through interviews, the book captures the doubts and regrets that seem to be overwhelming successful young adults.
Both men and women marry five years later now than they did a generation ago.
What could create larger opportunity costs than choosing one mate and losing the chance to enjoy all the attractive features of other potential spouses?
Whereas delaying marriage and avoiding commitment to a particular job would seem to promote self-discovery, this freedom and self-exploration seems to leave many people feeling more lost than found.
OR MOST OF HUMAN HIST ORY, PEOPLE WERE NOT REALLY FACED with an array of choices and opportunity costs.
? the question people asked themselves was more like Should I take it or leave it? In a world of scarcity, opportunities dont present themselves in bunches, and the decisions people face are between approach and avoidance, acceptance or rejection.
After millions of years of survival based on simple distinctions, it may simply be that we are Missed Opportunities | 143 biologically unprepared for the number of choices we face in the modern world.
As psychologist Susan Sugarman has pointed out, you can see this thumbnail history of our species played out in the early development of children.
Then, all of a sudden, perhaps when children have developed sufficient skill with language to make communication reliable, their parents are asking them, Do you want apple juice or orange juice? Do you want to go to the park or to the swimming pool? Do you want to go down the slide or go on the swings? Now yes or no will no longer do the job.
One mother described the dilemma facing her five-year-old this way: I have noticed that my son sometimes has difficulty making the sorts of choices that exclude one thing or another.
Finally making the choice somehow minimizes the pleasure in the thing that is gained, though there also seems to be an accompanying relief in finally making the choice.
Most recently I noticed him doing this when given a choice between different colored popsicles.
We all learn as we grow up that living requires making choices and passing up opportunities.
But our evolutionary history makes 144 | The Paradox of Choice this a difficult lesson.
We think of trade-offs as hurting less and opportunity costs as less troublesome, if we know that we can change our minds when it looks like weve made a mistake.
Facing decisionslarge or smallwith this attitude should mitigate many of the stresses and negative emotions weve been examining.
A series of recent studies gave some people a choice that was reversible and others a choice that was nonreversible.
What emerged from the findings was Missed Opportunities | 145 that, while participants valued being able to reverse their choices, almost no one actually did so.
However, those who had the option to change their minds were less satisfied with their choices than participants who did not have that option.
And, perhaps most important, the participants had no idea that keeping the option open to change their minds would affect their satisfaction with the things they chose.
Perhaps we do less work putting opportunity costs of the rejected alternatives out of our minds.
We would expect that those who see marriage as a nonreversible commitment will be more inclined to do psychological work that makes them feel satisfied with their decision than will those whose attitude about marriage is more relaxed.
As a result, individuals with nonreversible marriages might be more satisfied than individuals with reversible ones.
As we see reversible marriages come apart, we may think to ourselves, how fortunate the couple was to have a flexible attitude toward marital 146 | The Paradox of Choice commitment, given that it didnt work out.
It might not occur to us that the flexible attitude might have played a causal role in the marriages failure.
NOBODY LIKES T O WAT C H opportunity costs mount.
But the problem of trade-offs and opportunity costs will be dramatically attenuated for a satisficer.
Recall that satisficers are looking for something thats good enough, not something thats best.
Good enough can survive thinking about opportunity costs.
In addition, the good enough standard likely will entail much less searching and inspection of alternatives than the maximizers best standard.
With fewer alternatives under consideration, there will be fewer opportunity costs to be subtracted.
Finally, a satisficer is not likely to be thinking about the hypothetical perfect world, in which options exist that contain all the things they value and trade-offs are unnecessary.
For all these reasons, the pain of making trade-offs will be especially acute for maximizers.
Indeed, I believe that one of the reasons that maximizers are less happy, less satisfied with their lives, and more depressed than satisficers is precisely because the taint of trade-offs and opportunity costs washes out much that should be satisfying about the decisions they make.
.: The Problem of Regret  A NYTIME YOU MAKE A DECISION AND IT DOESNT TURN OUT WELL or you find an alternative that would have turned out better, youre a candidate for regret.
The chair never appeared, the seller was a fraud, and we (along with several others) lost a tidy sum of money.
Do we regret having been taken?
This is postdecision regret, regret that occurs after weve experienced the results of a decision.
But there is also something called anticipated regret, which rears its head even before a decision is made.
Postdecision regret is sometimes referred to as buyers remorse. After a purchasing decision, we start to have second thoughts, convincing ourselves that rejected alternatives were actually better than the one we chose, or imagining that there are better alternatives out there that we havent yet explored.
The bitter taste of regret detracts from the satisfaction we get, whether or not the 148 | The Paradox of Choice regret is justified.
Anticipated regret is in many ways worse, because it will produce not just dissatisfaction but paralysis.
Both types of regretanticipated and postdecisionwill raise the emotional stakes of decisions.
Anticipated regret will make decisions harder to make, and postdecision regret will make them harder to enjoy.
Individuals are not all equally susceptible to regret.
Recall that when my colleagues and I measured individual differences in regret, we found that people with high regret scores are less happy, less satisfied with life, less optimistic, and more depressed than those with low regret scores.
We also found that people with high regret scores tend to be maximizers.
Indeed, we think that concern about regret is a major reason that individuals are maximizers.
The only way to be sure that you wont regret a decision is by making the best possible decision.
So regret doesnt seem to serve people well psychologically.
And once again, the more options you have, the more likely it is that you will experience regret, either in anticipation of decisions or after them.
Which may be a major reason why adding choices to our lives doesnt always make us better off.
Even though there are differences among individuals in sensitivity to regret, some circumstances are more likely to trigger regret than others.
Who feels greater regret?
The key difference between them is that Mr. George regrets something he did (switching from Company B to Company A), while Mr. Paul regrets something he failed to do.
Most of us seem to share the intuition that we regret actions that dont turn out well more than we regret failures to take actions that would have turned out well.
This is sometimes referred to as an omission bias, a bias to downplay omissions (failures to act) when we evaluate the consequences of our decisions.
The omission bias undergoes a reversal with respect to decisions made in the more distant past.
When asked about what they regret most in the last six months, people tend to identify actions that didnt meet expectations.
But when asked about what they regret most when they look back on their lives as a whole, people tend to identify failures to act.
In the short run, we regret a bad educational choice, whereas in the long run, we regret a missed educational opportunity.
In the short run, we regret a broken romance, whereas in the long run, we regret a missed romantic opportunity.
But will you be regretful?
What is it that youll regret?
This is when youll feel regret.
But bad results make people regretful only if they bear responsibility.
If we put these factors together, we get a picture of the conditions that make regret especially powerful.
If we are responsible for an action that turns out badly and if it almost turned out well, then we are prime candidates for regret.
What is important about this picture is that the more that our experiences result from our own choices, the more regret we will feel if things dont turn out as we had hoped.
So although adding options may make it easier for us to choose something we really like, it will also make it easier for us to regret choices that dont live up to our hopes or expectations.
When confronted with a choice between a job that offers the possibility of rapid advancement and a job that offers congenial workmates, I can easily imagine finding a job that has both.
This ability to conjure up ideal scenarios provides a neverending supply of raw material for experiencing regret.
Without the ability to imagine a world that is different from our actual world and then to act to bring this imagined world into being, we never would have survived as a species, much less advanced through the millions of stages of speculation and trial and error that is the history of human progress.
But the downside of counterfactual thinking is that it fuels regret, both postdecision regret and anticipated regret.
Counterfactual thoughts are generated in response to experiences such as poor exam grades, trouble in romantic relationships, and the illness or death of loved ones.
And when the counterfactual thoughts begin to occur, they trigger more negative emotions, like regret, which in turn trigger more counterfactual thinking, which in turn triggers more negative emotion.
Though most people can manage to suppress their counterfactual thoughts before they spin too far down this vicious spiral, someespecially those who suffer from clinical depressionmay not be able to arrest the downward pull.
When they examine the actual content of counterfactual thinking, researchers find that individuals tend to focus on aspects of a situation that are under their control.
This focus on individual control conforms with my earlier point that regret and responsibility go hand in hand.
Of course, most of the situations we encounter have a mixture of aspects we could have controlled and aspects we couldnt have.
The fact that counterfactual thinking seems to hone in on the controllable aspects of a situation only increases the chances that a 154 | The Paradox of Choice person will experience regret when engaging in counterfactual thinking.
There is also an important distinction to be made between upward and downward counterfactuals.
Upward counterfactuals are imagined states that are better than what actually happened, and downward counterfactuals are imagined states that are worse.
So generating downward counterfactuals might engender not only a sense of satisfaction, but a sense of gratitude that things didnt turn out worse.
What studies have shown, however, is that people rarely produce downward counterfactuals unless asked specifically to do so.
A Regret and Satisfaction S WE HAVE SEEN, REGRET WILL MAKE US FEEL WORSE AFTER DECI- sionseven ones that work outthan we otherwise would, especially when we take opportunity costs into consideration.
.: The Problem of Regret THE BENEFITS OF D O W N WA R D | 155 COMPARISON  The New Yorker Collection 1993 Warren Miller from cartoonbank.com.
Opportunity costs capture the benefits that would have come as a result of a different choice, and as soon as you return from that seaside vacation, the counterfactual thinking may begin.
If only they had better restaurants there, it would have been perfect.
With each of these counterfactual thoughts, another little smidgen of regret insinuates itself into the evaluation of a decision.
156 | The Paradox of Choice And as we saw in the last chapter, if the number of candidates from which the choice is made goes up, each having some attractive feature that the chosen candidate does not, the opportunity costs (and the counterfactual thoughts and the smidgens of regret) mount higher and higher.
But an event also can be negative in relative termsrelative either to aspirations or expectations.
So if, by engaging in the careful decision-making process and trade-off assessment I discussed in the last chapter, you bring to mind all the wonderful things a seaside vacation might have included but didnt, there will be no shortage of negatives to occupy your mind, even if the vacation was good.
By thinking about what you will give up by going to the seaside, by imagining opportunity costs in advance, it seems inevitable that the anticipated regret induced by these thoughts will make the most attractive option seem less attractive.
Another way of making this point is in terms of contrast effects.
Any actual seaside vacation suffers by contrast with an imagined, perfect alternative, and with that counterfactual contrast comes regret, more acutely for people If Only .
.: The Problem of Regret | 157 who are maximizers than for people who are satisficers.
It is the maximizers who will have these counterfactual perfect options in mind, which will make any real-world option pale by comparison.
What Regret Makes Us Do U N L I K E O T H E R N E G AT I V E E M O T I O N S  A N G E R , S A D N E S S , D I S A P - pointment, even griefwhat is so difficult about regret is the feeling that the regrettable state of affairs could have been avoided and that it could have been avoided by you, if only you had chosen differently.
In the last chapter we saw that individuals facing decisions involving trade-offs, and thus opportunities for regret, will avoid making those decisions altogether.
Or if they cant avoid the decisions completely, they will construe them so that they no longer seem to involve trade-offs.
When it comes to buying a car, nothings more important than the safety of my family. When it comes to taking vacations, nothing compares to the smell of the ocean and the sound of the surf. The only thing I care about in a house is that I have enough space to spread out. And so on.
Not surprisingly, when confronted with decisions, we often choose the option that minimizes the chances that we will experience regret.
A Regret Aversion S WE SAW IN CHAPTER 3, MOST PEOPLE TEND T O BE RISK AVERSE when they are contemplating a choice between a certain small gain and an uncertain large one.
But another reason for risk aversion is regret aversion.
Suppose you have the choice between a guaranteed $100 and a risky $200, and suppose you choose the $100.
So youll have no reason to regret your decision to take the sure thing.
Taking the sure thing is a way to guarantee that you wont regret your decisionyou wont regret it because youll never know how the alternative would have turned out.
Under these conditions, people can no longer avoid the possibility of regret no matter which option they choose.
We show greater willingness to take risks when we know we will find out how the unchosen alternative turned out and there is thus no way to protect ourselves from regret.
Studies like this show that not only is regret an important consequence of many decisions, but that the prospect of regret is an important cause of many decisions.
People will make choices with the anticipation of regret firmly in mind.
If youre trying to decide whether to buy a Toyota Camry or a Honda Accord and your closest friend just bought an Accord, youre likely to buy one too, partly because the only way to avoid the information that you made a mis- If Only .
.: The Problem of Regret | 159 take is to buy what your friend bought and thus avoid potentially painful comparisons.
Of course, you cant really avoid that information completely.
But this kind of information pales in comparison to the vivid, detailed, day-after-day confirmation that your friend bought a better car than you did.
Another effect that the desire to avoid regret can have is to induce people not to act at all, what is called inaction inertia.
Several weeks of shopping fail to turn up anything better, so you go back to buy the one you saw earlier.
If they buy it, there will be no way to avoid regretting not having bought it earlier.
Examples of inaction inertia abound.
If we do sign up, we can no longer tell ourselves that we dont fly enough and it isnt worth the trouble; instead, we can only regret not having signed up earlier.
Once we join the distant club, all the reasons for not 160 | The Paradox of Choice joining go out the window and we are left regretting our initial failure to act.
I mentioned them as an example of what are called sunk costs.
Similarly, people hold on to stocks that have decreased in value because selling them would turn the investment into a loss.
In a classic demonstration of the power of sunk costs, people were offered season subscriptions to a local theater company.
Some were offered the tickets at full price and others at a discount.
Because it would constitute a bigger loss for the fullprice payers, failure to attend a performance would produce more regret.
From the perspective of a model of decision making that is future oriented, being sensitive to sunk costs is a mistake.
.: The Problem of Regret | 161 the ticket holders should be asking themselves on the night of the performance is, Will I get more satisfaction out of a night at the theater or out of a night spent reading and listening to music at home? But people dont operate this way.
According to the same logic of sunk costs, professional basketball coaches give more playing time to players earning higher salaries, independent of their current level of performance.
And people who have started their own businesses are more likely to invest in expanding them than people who have purchased their businesses from others.
What leads me to believe that sunk-cost effects are motivated by the desire to avoid regret rather than just the desire to avoid a loss is that sunk-cost effects are much bigger when a person bears responsibility for the initial decision (to buy the ski tickets or the expensive shoes).
I, personally, succumb to sunk-cost effects in a variety of settings that Im aware of, and probably many others that Im not.
Many people persist in very troubled relationships not because of love or what they owe the other person or because they feel a moral obligation to honor vows, but because of all the time and effort theyve already put in.
And arguably, why did the United States persist as long as it did in Vietnam, even when it was plain to virtually everyone involved that no good outcome could result from continued involvement?
R Regret, Maximizing, and Choice Possibilities EGRET OBVIOUSLY PLAYS A VERY BIG ROLE IN ALL OUR DECISIONS , but how does choice, particularly an overabundance of choice, affect regret?
We have seen that two of the factors affecting regret are 1.
.: The Problem of Regret | 163 The availability of choice obviously exacerbates both of these factors.
Disappointment, maybe; regret, no.
When the option you actually settle on proves disappointing, you regret not having chosen more wisely.
And as the number of options continues to proliferate, making an exhaustive investigation of the possibilities impossible, concern that there may be a better option out there may induce you to anticipate the regret you will feel later on, when that option is discovered, and thus prevent you from making a decision at all.
When considering a decision involving complex possibilities, the fact that there is no one option that is best in all respects will induce people to consider the opportunity costs associated with choosing the best option.
So opportunity costs will mount as the number of options increases, and as opportunity costs mount, so will regret.
There will be anticipatory regret that the overall best car doesnt have the best sound system (Will I be kicking myself for not having better sound if I buy this car?), and there will be postdecision regret that the overall best car doesnt have the best sound system (Why couldnt they have made the stereo better?).
And with each if only you generate will come a little more regret and a little less satisfaction with the choice you actually made.
Though it may be annoying to go into a bank and discover that only a single tellers window is open and the line is long, there wont be anything to regret.
Ironically, then, the greater the number of appealing choices, the greater the opportunity for regret. It should also be clear that the problem of regret will loom larger for maximizers than for satisficers.
No matter how good something is, if a maximizer discovers something better, hell regret having failed to choose it in the first place.
Perfection is the only weapon against regret, and endless, exhaustive, paralyzing consideration of the alternatives is the only way to achieve perfection.
The possibility of regret doesnt loom as large, and perfection is unnecessary.
E ALL KNOW THAT REGRET CAN MAKE PEOPLE MISERABLE, B U T regret also serves several important functions.
First, antici- pating that we may regret a decision may induce us to take the decision seriously and to imagine the various scenarios that may follow it.
Second, regret may emphasize the mistakes we made in arriving at a decision, so that, should a similar situation arise in the future, we wont make the same mistakes.
Third, regret may mobilize or motivate us to take the actions necessary to undo a decision or ameliorate some of its unfortunate consequences.
Fourth, regret is a signal to others that we care about what happened, are sorry that it happened, and will do what we can to make sure that it doesnt happen again.
Because so many of the decisions we make have consequences for others, a If Only .
.: The Problem of Regret | 165 sign to those others that we feel their pain may induce them to stick with us and trust us in the future.
And even when decisions dont turn out badly, it is often appropriate and important to experience and acknowledge regret.
If you decide to take a job 2,500 miles away from your family, it is appropriate to regret having been put in the position of trading off a good job opportunity against family ties, even if the decision works out well.
The mere fact that such trade-offs have to be made is regrettable.
And to acknowledge the fact of tragic choices is merely to give the sacrifices entailed in a choice their due.
Still, for people who are so plagued by regret that they cant let go of decisions in the past and have enormous difficulty making decisions in the present, taking steps to reduce regret could be extremely beneficial to their well-being.
In Chapter 11, we will discuss a general approach to coping with a world of choice, and many of these methods have the direct effect of diminishing our tendency to regret.
CHAPTER EIGHT Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation  W HILE REGRET AND OPPORTUNITY COSTS C AN FOCUS OUR ATTEN- tion on what weve passed up, there is also plenty of room for dissatisfaction with the options that we actually choose.
Youre hit with a double whammyregret about what you didnt choose, and disappointment with what you did.
This ubiquitous feature of human psychology is a process known as adaptation.
My first desktop computer had 8K of memory, loaded programs by cassette tape (it took five minutes to load a simple program), and was anything but user-friendly.
When I first got cable TV, I was ecstatic about the reception and excited about all the choices it provided 168 | The Paradox of Choice (many fewer than today).
Because of adaptation, enthusiasm about positive experiences doesnt sustain itself.
And whats worse, people seem generally unable to anticipate that this process of adaptation will take place.
Researchers have known about and studied adaptation for many years, but for the most part they emphasized perceptual adaptationdecreased responsiveness to sights, sounds, odors and the like as people continue to experience them.
A New Yorker, thoroughly adapted to the citys hyperstimulation, is oblivious to it.
In the same way that we each have our own internal thermometer for registering sensation, we each have a pleasure thermometer, that runs from negative (unpleasant), through neutral, to pleasant.
In this case it is hedonic adaptation, or adaptation to pleasure.
An experience that boosts our hedonic or pleasure temperature by say 20 degrees at the first encounter may Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 169 boost it by only 15 degrees the next time, by 10 degrees the time after that, and eventually it may stop boosting it at all.
Now the heat hits you like a blast from an open oven, and you notice the air-conditioning that you no longer have.
In 1973, 13 percent of Americans thought of air-conditioning in their cars as a necessity.
Even though we dont expect it to happen, such adaptation to pleasure is inevitable, and it may cause more disappointment in a world of many choices than in a world of few.
The $60,000 salary, however briefly it was available, may establish for this person a new baseline or reference point of hedonic neutrality, so that anything less is taken as a loss.
We often hear people say things like, I never knew wine could taste this good, or I never knew sex could be this exciting, or I never expected to make this much money. Novelty can change someones hedonic standards so that what was once good enough, or even better than that, no longer is.
And as well see, adaptation can be especially disappointing when weve put much time and effort into selecting, from a myriad of possibilities, the items or experiences we end up adapting to.
I Hedonic Adaptation and Hedonic Treadmills N WHAT IS PERHAPS THE MOST FAMOUS EXAMPLE OF HEDONIC ADAP - tation, respondents were asked to rate their happiness on a 5- point scale.
Some of them had won between $50,000 and $1 million in state lotteries within the last year.
Not surprisingly, the lottery winners were happier than those who had become paralyzed.
What is surprising, though, is that the lottery winners were no happier than people in general.
And what is even more surprising is that the accident victims, while somewhat less happy than people in general, still judged themselves to be happy.
And if you had asked accident victims how happy they were right after they suffered their disability, they would have been as low as can be.
But as time passes, and the winners and the accident victims get used to their new circumstances, the hedonic thermometers in both groups begin to converge, becoming much more like the population at large.
As I said, there are two reasons why these dramatic hedonic adaptations occur.
Second, the new standard of whats a good experience (winning the lottery) may make many of the ordinary pleasures of daily life (the smell of freshly brewed coffee, the new blooms and refreshing breezes of a lovely spring day) rather tame by comparison.
And indeed when the lottery winners were asked to rate the hedonic quality of various everyday activities, they rated them as less pleasurable than nonlottery winners did.
In the case of the accident victims, there is probably still more going on.
The immediate aftermath of the accident is crushing, because these accident victims have lived their lives as mobile individuals and they possess none of the skills that enable paraplegics to negotiate in the environment.
Twenty-five years ago, economist Tibor Scitovsky explored some of the consequences of the phenomenon of adaptation in his book The Joyless Economy.
But as people adaptas the novelty wears offpleasure comes to be replaced by comfort.
The result of having pleasure turn into comfort is disappointment, and the disappointment will be especially severe when the goods we are consuming are durable goods, such as cars, houses, stereo systems, elegant clothes, jewelry, and computers.
When the brief period of real enthusiasm and pleasure wanes, people still have these things around themas a constant reminder that consumption isnt all its cracked up to be, that expectations are not matched by reality.
And as a societys affluence grows, consumption shifts increasingly to expensive, durable goods, with the result that disappointment with consumption increases.
Most are driven instead to pursue novelty, to seek out new commodities and experiences whose pleasure potential has not been dissipated by repeated exposure.
In time, these new commodities also will lose their intensity, but people still get caught up in the chase, a process that psychologists Philip Brickman and Donald Campbell labeled the hedonic treadmill.
And because Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 173 of adaptation, no matter how good your choices and how pleasurable the results, you still end up back where you started in terms of subjective experience.
Perhaps even more insidious than the hedonic treadmill is something that Daniel Kahneman calls the satisfaction treadmill.
Suppose that in addition to adapting to particular objects or experiences, you also adapt to particular levels of satisfaction.
In other words, suppose that with great ingenuity and effort in making decisions, you manage to keep your hedonic temperature at +20 degrees, so that you feel pretty good about life almost all of the time.
Well, it might be good enough at the beginning, but if you adapt to this particular level of happiness, then +20 wont feel so good after a while.
So even if you manage to defeat or outsmart the inexorable adaptation to commodities and experiences, you still have to defeat adaptation to subjective feelings about these commodities and experiences.
Chances are that if lottery winners knew in advance just how little winning the lottery would improve their subjective well-being, they wouldnt be buying lottery tickets.
In one study of this type, college students in the Midwest were asked how it would feel to live in California.
They judged that students who lived in California were happier with the climate and more satisfied with life as a whole than Midwesterners.
California college students did like the climate, but they were not happier than Midwest college students.
Just because its sunny and warm in California most of the time doesnt mean that students who live in California dont have problems boring classes, too much work, not enough money, hassles with family and friends, romantic disappointments, and so on.
It may be marginally more pleasant to be stressed and hassled on a warm, sunny day than on a freezing, snowy one, but not enough to make much of a difference in your outlook on life.
In still another study, young college professors were asked to think about how they would feel after they were either awarded or denied tenure.
The participants in the study were somewhat mindful of adaptation effects, and, accordingly, they expected to be extremely happy (or sad) when the decision was made, but that this joy or sadness would dissipate somewhat over time.
The predictions of these professors were compared to the experiences of faculty who had actually experienced positive or negative tenure decisions either very recently, five years before, or ten years before.
Amazingly, with the passage of time, there was no difference in reported well-being between professors who had been awarded tenure and those who had been passed over for the lifetime appointment.
Even with adaptation in mind, the predictors substantially overestimated how good a positive decision would make them feel and how bad a negative decision would make them feel in the long run.
Admittedly, there is more to the mismatch between prediction and experience than just the failure to anticipate adaptation.
My colleagues were a bore. The students were losers. The job was killing me; I worked all the time and had no life. It liberated me; I became a consultant and worked decent hours for twice the salary. But failure to anticipate adaptation is surely a part of this mismatch.
And they underestimate how they will adjust to severe illness.
Elderly patients suffering from 176 | The Paradox of Choice a variety of the most common debilitating illnesses of advanced age reliably judge the quality of their lives more positively than do the physicians who are treating them.
Its easy to see how results like these would follow directly from the fact that we adapt to almost everything, but ignore or underestimate adaptation effects in predicting the future.
When they have children, they are making predictions about their enduring feelings about family life.
If people err systematically and substantially in making those predictions, its likely that they will make some bad decisionsdecisions that produce regret, even when events turn out well.
T Adaptation and the Choice Problem HE AB UNDANCE OF CHOICE AVAILABLE TO US EXACERB ATES THE problem of adaptation by increasing the costs, in time and effort, of making a decision.
Time, effort, opportunity costs, anticipated Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 177 regret, and the like are fixed costs that we pay up front in making a decision, and those costs then get amortized over the life of the decision.
If the decision provides substantial satisfaction for a long time after it is made, the costs of making it recede into insignificance.
But if the decision provides satisfaction for only a short time, those costs loom large.
So the more choices we have, the more effort goes into our decisions, and the more we expect to enjoy the benefits of those decisions.
And adaptation makes agonizing over decisions a bad investment.
It should also be obvious that the phenomenon of adaptation will have more profound effects on people who set out to maximize than it will on people who are aiming for good enough.
It is maximizers for whom expanded opportunities really create a time and effort problem.
It is maximizers who make a really big investment in each of their decisions, who agonize most about trade-offs.
And so it is maximizers who will be most disappointed when they discover the pleasure they derive from their decisions to be short-lived.
A world with multiple options may make possible better objective choices than a world with few options.
But at the same time, happiness doesnt count for nothing, and subjective 178 | The Paradox of Choice experience isnt trivial.
If adaptation saddles people with a subjective experience of their choices that doesnt justify the effort that went into making those choices, people will begin to see choice not as a liberator but as a burden.
F YOU LIVE IN A WORLD IN WHICH YOU EXPERIENCE MISERY MORE often than joy, adaptation is very beneficial.
But if you live in a world of plenty, in which sources of joy outnumber sources of misery, then adaptation defeats your attempts to enjoy your good fortune.
While we dont get to do and to have everything we want, no other people on earth have ever had such control over their lives, such material abundance, and such freedom of choice.
Whereas adaptation does nothing to negate the objective improvements in our lives that all this freedom and abundance bring, it does much to negate the satisfaction we derive from those improvements.
We could go a long way toward improving the experienced wellbeing of people in our society if we could find a way to stop the process of adaptation.
But adaptation is so fundamental and universal a feature of our responses to events in the worldit is so much a hardwired property of our nervous systemsthat there is very little we can do to mitigate it directly.
Factoring in adaptation to the decision-making process may make differences that seem large at the moment of Why Decisions Disappoint: The Problem of Adaptation | 179 choice feel much smaller.
Factoring in adaptation may help us be satisfied with choices that are good enough rather than the best, and this in turn will reduce the time and effort we devote to making those choices.
But individuals who regularly experience and express gratitude are physically healthier, more optimistic about the future, and feel better about their lives than those who do not.
Individuals who experience gratitude are more alert, enthusiastic, and energetic than those who do not, and they are more likely to achieve personal goals.
And unlike adaptation, the experience of gratitude is something we can affect directly.
Experiencing and expressing gratitude actually get easier with practice.
By causing us to focus on how much better our lives are than they could have been, or were before, the disappointment that adaptation brings in its wake can be blunted.
When we consider whether we liked a meal, a vacation, or a class, inevitably we are asking ourselves, Compared to what? For purposes of making decisions about what to do in the future, the Was it good or bad? question is less important than How good or bad was it? Very few meals in restaurants are actually bad distasteful enough to induce us to spit out our food and leave.
Nonetheless, we describe restaurants to our friends as bad, and they understand us to mean that compared to some standard, this restaurant is on the wrong side of zero.
Again, as well see, an overload of choice contributes to this dissatisfaction.
The Paradox of Choice Hopes, Expectations, Past Experience, and the Experience of Others HEN PEOPLE EVALUATE AN EXPERIENCE, THEY ARE PERFORMING one or more of the following comparisons: Comparing the experience to what they hoped it would be 2.
Comparing the experience to experiences that others have had Each of these comparisons makes the evaluation of an experience relative, and this may diminish the experience or enhance it.
If someone is out for a great dinner, and shes just read glowing reviews of the restaurant, her hopes and expectations will be high.
If shes recently had a great meal in another restaurant, her standard of comparison with her past experience will be high.
And if just before dinner she listened to one of her dining companions describe in ecstatic detail a meal he recently had, her social standard of comparison will be high.
Given all this, the chef in this restaurant is going to be challenged to produce a meal that will move this persons hedonic thermometer any higher.
The same meal, in the same restaurant, can be Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 183 judged negatively on the basis of the first set of comparisons and positively on the basis of the second.
In the same way, getting a B+ on a difficult exam can fall to either side of the hedonic neutral point.
Social scientist Alex Michalos, in his discussion of the perceived quality of experience, argued that people establish standards of satisfaction based on the assessment of three gaps: the gap between what one has and wants, the gap between what one has and thinks others like oneself have, and the gap between what one has and the best one has had in the past. Michalos found that much of the individual variation in life satisfaction could be explained in terms not of differences in objective experience, but in terms of differences in these three perceived gaps.
To these three comparisons I have added a fourth: the gap between what one has and what one expects.
As our material and social circumstances improve, our standards of comparison go up.
As we have contact with items of high quality, we begin to suffer from the curse of discernment. The lower quality items that used to be perfectly acceptable are no longer good enough.
The hedonic zero point keeps rising, and expectations and aspirations rise with it.
In some respects, rising standards of acceptability are an indication of progress.
In part because the members of a society develop higher and higher standards for what is good, people live much better material lives today than they ever did before, objectively speaking.
If your hedonic assessment derives from the relation between the objective quality of an experience and your expectations, then the rising quality of experience is met with rising expectations, and youre just running in place.
The hedonic treadmill and the satisfaction treadmill that I discussed in the last chapter explain to a significant degree how real income can increase by a factor of two (in the U.S.) or five (in Japan) without having a measurable effect on the subjective well-being of the members of society.
As long as expectations keep pace with realizations, people may live better, but they wont feel better about how they live.
It is called prospect theory, and it was developed by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky.
To understand how we will judge an experience, it is necessary first to find out where we set our hedonic zero point.
In Chapter 3, I emphasized how language can affect the framing of an experience and thus, the setting of the zero point.
Real hedonic charge comes when an experience exceeds expectations.
And hedonic distress comes when experience fails to live up to expectations.
Past experience also affects the setting of the zero point, which is, in part, what adaptation is about.
I The Curse of High Expectations N THE FALL OF 1999, THE NEW YORK TIMES AND CBS NEWS ASKED teenagers to compare their experience with what their parents had experienced growing up.
Overall, 43 percent of the respondents said they were having a harder time than their parents did, but 50 percent of children from affluent households said their lives were harder.
When probed, the teenagers from affluent households talked about high expectations, both their own and their parents.
They talked about too-muchness: too many activities, too many consumer choices, too much to learn.
Whereas teens from lowincome households talked about how much easier it was to get schoolwork done thanks to computers and the Internet, teens from high-income homes talked about how much had to be sifted through because of computers and the Internet.
Fear of falling, as Barbara Ehrenreich put it, is the curse of high expectations.
One part of life where the curse of high expectations is apparent 186 | The Paradox of Choice is health and health care.
No matter how frustrating it is for people to get prompt and decent health care in the age of managed care, there is no question that the state of American health is better than its ever been.
Nonetheless, as medical historian Roy Porter points out, in this age of unparalleled longevity and control over disease, there is also unparalleled anxiety about health.
So though modern health practices help extend our lives, they dont seem to provide an appropriate degree of satisfaction.
What contributes to high expectations, above and beyond the quality of past experience, is, I think, the amount of choice and control we now have over most aspects of our lives.
If instead Id been shopping in a store that offered hundreds even thousandsof options, my expectations would have been a good deal higher.
But now, confronted with relaxed fit, easy fit, slim fit, tapered leg, boot cut, and who knows what else, my standards have gone up.
The proliferation of options seems to lead, inexorably, to the raising of expectations.
Almost by definition, to be a maximizer is to have high standards, high expectations.
Because of this, and because of the role played by expectations in hedonic evaluations, an experience that is on the positive side of the hedonic thermometer for a satisficer may be on the negative side for a maximizer.
The lesson here is that high expectations can be counterproductive.
We probably can do more to affect the quality of our lives by controlling our expectations than we can by doing virtually anything else.
The blessing of modest expectations is that they leave room for many experiences to be a pleasant surprise, a hedonic plus.
The challenge is to find a way to keep expectations modest, even as actual experiences keep getting better.
Whats the point of great meals, great wines, and great blouses if they dont make you feel great?
O The Curse of Social Comparison F ALL THE SOURCES WE RELY ON WHEN WE EVALUATE EXPERIENCES , perhaps nothing is more important than comparisons to other people.
Our answer to the How am I doing? question depends on our own past experiences, aspirations, and expectations, but the question is virtually never asked or answered in a social vacuum.
How am I doing? almost always carries compared to others in parentheses.
188 | The Paradox of Choice Social comparison provides information that helps people evaluate experiences.
Is your marriage going well?
Are you sufficiently valued at work?
Although it is possible to derive approximate answers to questions like these without looking around at others, approximate answers arent good enough.
Looking at others permits the fine-tuning of assessments.
Just as we saw in Chapter 7 that the counterfactuals we construct can be tilted upward (imagining a better result) or downward (imagining a worse one), so too with social comparisons.
People can compare themselves with others who have done better (upward social comparison) or worse (downward social comparison).
Usually, downward social comparisons nudge people up the hedonic thermometer, and upward social comparisons nudge them down.
Indeed, social psychologists have found that upward comparisons produce jealousy, hostility, negative mood, frustration, lowered selfesteem, decreased happiness, and symptoms of stress.
By the same token, downward comparisons have been found to boost selfesteem, increase positive mood, and reduce anxiety.
At times, people engaging in social comparison respond positively to upward comparisons and negatively to downward comparisons.
Learning that others are worse off can lead you to consider that you yourself can become worse off.
When you compare yourself with others who are worse off, you may take pleasure in your superiority, but you may also experience guilt, embarrassment, the need to cope with other peoples envy or resentment, and the fear that their fate could happen to you.
And when you compare yourself with others who are better off, you may Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 189 feel envy or resentment, but you may also be motivated or inspired.
For example, in one study, encountering information about other cancer patients who were in better shape improved the mood of cancer patients, probably because it gave them hope that their condition also could improve.
In many ways, social comparison parallels the counterfactual thinking process, but there is one very important difference.
In principle, we have a great deal of control over both when we will engage in counterfactual thinking and what its content will be.
We have less control over social comparison.
If you live in a social world, as we all do, you are always being hit with information about how others are doing.
You and your spouse fight on the way to a party, only to find yourselves surrounded by couples who seem to delight in each others presence.
This kind of information just cant be avoided.
P The Race for Status E O P L E A R E D R I V E N T O S O C I A L C O M PA R I S O N L A R G E L Y B E C AU S E they care about status, and status, of course, has social compar- ison built into it.
Part of the satisfaction from achievements and possessions comes from the awareness that not everyone can match them.
As others start to catch up, the desires of those who are ahead in the race escalate so that they can maintain their privileged position.
So instead of comparing ourselves to everyone, we try to mark off the world in such a way that in our pond, in comparison with our reference group, we are successful.
The way to be happythe way to succeed in the quest for statusis to find the right pond and stay in it.
Just how profound is this concern for status?
For example, people were asked to choose between earning $50,000 a year with others earning $25,000 and earning $100,000 a year with others earning $200,000.
They were asked to choose between 12 years of education (high school) when others have 8, and 16 years of education (college) when others have 20.
They were asked to choose between an IQ of 110 when the IQ of others is 90 and an IQ of 130 when the IQ of others is 150.
NONETHELESS , I BELIEVE that the problem is more acute now than in the past, and once again it comes back to having a plethora of choices.
When we engage in our inevitable social comparisons, to whom do we com- Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 191 pare ourselves?
In earlier times, such comparisons were necessarily local.
We looked around at our neighbors and family members.
We didnt have access to information about people outside our immediate social circle.
But with the explosion of telecommunicationsTV, movies, the Internetalmost everyone has access to information about almost everyone else.
There would have been little to incite his status-enhancing aspirations.
Now this person gets to see how the wealthy live countless times every day.
This essentially universal and unrealistically high standard of comparison decreases the satisfaction of those of us who are in the middle or below, even as the actual circumstances of our lives improve.
I Positional Competition F WE ST OPPED THE DISCUSSION HERE, IT WOULD BE TEMPTING T O conclude that the dissatisfaction that comes with social compari- son can be fixed by teaching people to care less about status.
Disappointment from social comparison would be understood as a problem that affects society by affecting individuals and that can be fixed by changing individual attitudes, one person at a time.
But even if people could be taught to care less about status, they would still not be satisfied with what they have, because they have legitimate reasons for believing that no matter how much a person has, it may not be enough.
Our social and economic system, which is based in part on an unequal distribution of scarce and highly desirable commodities, inherently propels people into lives of per- 192 | The Paradox of Choice  The New Yorker Collection 2001 Barbara Smaller from cartoonbank.com.
petual social comparison and dissatisfaction, so that reforming people without paying attention to the system wont work.
As I mentioned in Chapter 4, economist Fred Hirsch argued in his book Social Limits to Growth that while technological development may continue to increase the number of people who can be fed from an acre of farmland or the number of children who can be Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 193 inoculated against polio for $1,000, there are certain kinds of goods that no amount of technological development will make universally available.
Hirsch calls goods like these positional goods, because how likely anyone is to get them depends upon his position in society.
No matter how many resources a person has, if everyone else has at least as much, his chances of enjoying these positional goods are slim.
Sometimes these kinds of goods are positional simply because the supply cant be increased.
At other times, the problem is that as more consumers gain access to these goods, their value decreases due to overcrowding.
The New York City area has several lovely beaches, enough to accommodate thousands.
We might all agree that everyone would be better off if there were less positional competition.
Its stressful, its wasteful, and it distorts peoples lives.
Again, others follow.
When people pursue goods that are positional, they cant help being in the rat race.
HOUGH SOCIAL COMPARISON INFORMATION IS SEEMINGLY ALL- pervasive, it appears that not everyone pays attention to it, or at least, not everyone is affected by it.
Psychologist Sonja Lyubomirsky and her colleagues have done a series of studies that looked for differences among individuals in their responses to social comparison information, and what they have found is that this kind of data has relatively little impact on happy people.
To begin with, Lyubomirsky developed a questionnaire, which youll find on page 196, designed to measure what might be called Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 195 peoples chronic level of happiness (as opposed to their moods at a particular moment in time) to categorize participants as relatively happy or unhappy.
Lyubomirsky found that happy people were only minimally affected by whether the person working next to them was better or worse at the anagram task than they were.
In a second study, participants were asked to videotape a lesson for preschool children.
Unhappy people, on the other hand, were very much affected by the feedback their partner received.
Thus it seemed as though the only thing that mattered to the unhappy people was how they did in comparison to their partner.
Better to be told that youre a pretty bad teacher but that others are even worse than to be told that youre a pretty good teacher, but others are better.
Do unhappy people ruminate more than happy ones about social comparison, or does ruminating more about social comparison make someone unhappy?
My suspicion is that both are true that the tendency to ruminate traps unhappy people in a downward psychological spiral that is fed by social comparison.
Certainly, it is safe to say that, based on available research, social comparison does nothing to improve ones satisfaction with the choices one makes.
198 | Y The Paradox of Choice Maximizing, Satisficing, and Social Comparison OUR LEVEL OF HAPPINESS IS NOT THE ONLY FACT OR THAT COLORS your response to social comparison.
In the research I discussed in Chapter 4, we took participants who had filled out our Maximization Scale, and put them in a situation like the one I just described, in which they had to unscramble anagrams alongside another person who was doing the task faster or slower than they were.
We found that maximizers were much more affected by the presence of another person than satisficers were.
Solving anagrams alongside someone who seemed to be doing it better produced in maximizers both a deterioration of mood and a lowered assessment of their anagram-solving ability.
The social comparison information had no such effect on satisficers.
In addition, when maximizers and satisficers were asked questions about how they shop, maximizers reported being much more concerned with social comparison than satisficers did.
They were more attentive than satisficers to what other people were buying, and more influenced in judgments of their own satisfaction by the apparent satisfaction of others.
If you think about what maximizing requires of people, this result is not surprising.
Maximizers want the best, but how do you know that you have the best, except by comparison?
Satisficers who are looking for results that are good enough can use the experiences of others to help them determine exactly what good enough is, but they dont Why Everything Suffers from Comparison | 199 have to.
They can rely on their own internal assessments to develop those standards.
It doesnt matter that others may earn more.
The word maximizing, implying as it does a desire for the best, suggests standards that are absolute.
Presumably, someone with absolute standards would not be especially concerned or affected by what others are doing.
Satisficing, in contrast, implying as it does a desire for good enough, suggests relative standardsrelative to ones own past experience and the past experience of others.
It is maximizers who have the relative standards and satisficers who have the absolute ones.
While, in theory, the best is an ideal that exists independent of what other people have, in practice, determining the best is so difficult that people fall back on comparisons with others.
But critically, it will not, or need not, be relative to either the standards or the achievements of others.
So, once again, satisficing appears the better way to maintain ones autonomy in the face of an overwhelming array of choices.
W Choice Options and Social Comparison E HAVE ALREADY SEEN HOW THE MORE OPTIONS WE HAVE, THE more difficulty we have gathering the information necessary to make a good decision.
The more difficult information gathering 200 | The Paradox of Choice is, the more likely it is that you will rely on the decisions of others.
Even if you are not after the best wallpaper for your kitchen, when faced with a choice among hundreds or thousands of possibilities, the search for something good enough can be enormously simplified by knowing what others have chosen.
So overwhelming choice is going to push you in the direction of looking over your shoulder at what others are doing.
But the more social comparison you do, the more likely you are to be affected by it, and the direction of such effects tends to be negative.
So by forcing us to look around at what others are doing before we make decisions, the world of bountiful options is encouraging a process that will often, if not always, leave us feeling worse about our decisions than we would if we hadnt engaged in the process to begin with.
Here is yet another reason why increasing the available options will decrease our satisfaction with what we choose.
Unlimited choice, I believe, can produce genuine suffering.
The American happiness quotient has been going gently but consistently downhill for more than a generation.
While the American gross domestic product, a primary measure of prosperity, more than doubled in the last thirty years, the proportion of the population describing itself as very happy declined.
The same pattern is present when respondents are asked more specific questionsabout how happy they are with their marriages, their jobs, their financial circumstances, and their places of residence.
It seems that as American society grows wealthier and Americans become 202 | The Paradox of Choice freer to pursue and do whatever they want, Americans get less and less happy.
The most dramatic manifestation of this decrease in societal happiness is in the prevalence of clinical depression, at the opposite end of the happiness continuum. By some estimates, depression in the year 2000 was about ten times as likely as depression in the year 1900.
The symptoms of depression include  Loss of interest or pleasure in routine daily activities, including work and family  Loss of energy, fatigue  Feelings of worthlessness, guilt, and self-blame  Indecisiveness  Inability to concentrate or think clearly  Recurrent thoughts of death, including thoughts of suicide  Insomnia  Loss of interest in sex  Loss of interest in food  Sadness: feelings of helplessness, hopelessness  Low self-esteem Aside from the obvious fact that victims of depression are miserably unhappy, depression also takes a major toll on society in general.
The friends, coworkers, spouses, and children of depressed people suffer too.
Children are less well cared for, friendships are neglected or abused, coworkers must take up the slack from inadequate job performance.
Choice, Disappointment, and Depression | 203 ing heart disease.
Suicide is, of course, the most extreme consequence of depression.
Depressed people commit suicide at roughly 25 times the rate of nondepressed people, and it is estimated that about 80 percent of suicidal people are significantly depressed.
Clinical depression is a complex phenomenon that comes in several varieties and undoubtedly has multiple causes.
As our understanding of depression improves, it may turn out that what we now regard as a single disorder will be viewed as a family of disorders, with overlapping manifestations but distinct causes.
So you should understand that the discussion of depression that follows will not capture the experience of every person who suffers from it.
E Learned Helplessness, Control, and Depression ARLIER WE DISCUSSED SELIGMAN AND HIS COLLEAGUES DISCOVERY of learned helplessness. They were conducting a series of experiments on basic learning processes in animals.
The explanation for this failure was that when the animals were being exposed to the uncontrollable shocks, they learned that they were helpless.
Having learned this helplessness, the animals then transferred the lesson to the new situation, one in which they actually did have control.
As the laboratory work on learned helplessness continued, 204 | The Paradox of Choice Seligman was struck by a variety of parallels between helpless animals and people who are clinically depressed.
Seligman speculated that at least some instances of clinical depression were the result of individuals having experienced one significant loss of control over their lives and then coming to believe that they were helpless, that they could expect this helplessness to persist into the future and to be present across a wide range of different circumstances.
According to Seligmans hypothesis, therefore, having control is of crucial importance to psychological well-being.
The fundamental significance of having control was highlighted in a study of three-month-old infants done more than thirty years ago.
Infants in one groupthose who had controlwere placed faceup in an ordinary crib with their heads on a pillow.
These figures were not visible to the infants, but if the infants turned their heads on the pillows, a small light would go on behind the umbrella, making the dancing figures visible for a little while.
When the infants did turn their heads, just by chance, and turned on the light and saw the dancing figures, they showed interest, delight, and excitement.
Other infants in the study got a free ride. Whenever a control infant turned on the light behind the umbrella in its crib, that action also turned on the light behind the umbrella in the crib of another infant.
So these other infants got to see the dancing figures just as often and for just as long as their controlling partners did.
Initially, these infants Whose Fault Is It?
The different reactions of the two groups caused researchers to conclude that it is not dancing toy animals that are an endless source of delight for infants, but rather having control.
And I can do it again whenever I want. The other infants, those who got the display for free, did not have this exhilarating experience of control.
Young infants have little control over anything.
They dont have very good control over their hands, so that grasping and manipulating objects is not easy.
The world is just a set of things that happen to them, leaving them completely at the mercy of others.
It is perhaps for just this reason that the occasional bits of evidence that they can control certain things are so salient and so exciting.
The significance of control to well-being was also dramatically demonstrated by a study of people at the opposite end of the life cycle.
The first group was also given several mundane choices to make every day and a plant to take care of in their rooms, while members of the second group had no such choices and had their plants cared for by the staff.
The nursing home residents given a small measure of control over their daily lives were more active and alert, and reported a greater sense of well-being than the residents without such control.
Even more dramatically, the residents who had control lived several 206 | The Paradox of Choice years longer, on average, than the residents who did not.
Thus, from cradle to grave, having control over ones life matters.
Chief among them was that not everyone who experiences a significant lack of control becomes depressed.
The revised theory of helplessness and depression suggested that important psychological steps intervene between the experience of helplessness and depression.
According to the new theory, when people experience a failure, a lack of control, they ask themselves why.
If your rsum is unimpressive and you choke at interviews, if youre a passive kind of person, and if you believe that the last job was really available for the right person (not you), then your expectations for the future are pretty bleak.
The revised theory of helplessness and depression argued that helplessness induced by failure or lack of control leads to depression if a persons causal explanations for that failure are global, chronic, and personal.
Whats the point of getting out of bed, getting dressed, and trying again if the results are foreordained.
People do differ in the types of predispositions they display.
Optimists say things like I got an A and She gave me a C. Pessimists say things like I got a C and He gave me an A. And it is the pessimists who are candidates for depression.
Nonetheless, I think it is fair to say that for most people, most of the time, excessive self-blame has bad psychological consequences.
And as well see, it is much easier to blame yourself for disappointing results in a world that provides unlimited choice than in a world in which options are limited.
Choice, Disappointment, and Depression T | 209 Helplessness, Depression, and Modern Life HE AMERIC AN MIDDLE CLASS NOW EXPERIENCES CONTROL AND PER- sonal autonomy to a degree unimaginable to people living in other times and places.
And they, not their government, get to decide what they watch on television or read in the newspaper.
This autonomy, coupled with the helplessness theory of depression, might suggest that clinical depression in the United States should be disappearing.
Furthermore, depression seems to attack its victims at a younger age now than in earlier eras.
Current estimates are that as many as 7.5 percent of Americans have an episode of clinical depression before they are fourteen.
And the most extreme manifestation of depressionsuicideis also on the rise, and it, too, is happening younger.
Suicide is the second leading cause of death (after accidents) among American high school and college students.
In the past thirty-five years, the suicide rate among American college students has tripled.
Throughout the developed world suicide among adolescents and young adults is increasing dramatically.
In a study comparing rates in 1990 to rates in the 1970s and 1980s, UNICEF found that the incidence of suicide tripled in France, more than doubled in Norway, doubled in Australia, and increased by 50 percent or more in Canada, England, 210 | The Paradox of Choice and the U.S. Only in Japan and what was then West Germany did youth suicide go down.
In an era of ever greater personal autonomy and control, what could account for this degree of personal misery?
F Rising Expectations IRST, I THINK INCREASES IN EXPERIENCED CONTROL OVER THE YEARS have been accompanied, stride for stride, by increases in expecta- tions about control.
Our children are supposed to be beautiful, smart, affectionate, obedient, and independent.
With all the choice available, we should never have to settle for things that are just good enough. Emphasis on freedom of choice, together with the proliferation of possibilities that modern life affords, has, I believe, contributed to these unrealistic expectations.
In the last chapter we saw that the amount of pleasure and satisfaction we derive from experience has as much to do with how the experience relates to expectations as it does with the qualities of the experience itself.
People on diets evaluate weight loss relative to expectations about weight loss.
College students evaluate grades relative to expectations about grades.
If Im right about the expectations of modern Americans about the qual- Whose Fault Is It?
Choice, Disappointment, and Depression | 211 ity of their experiences, almost every experience people have nowadays will be perceived as a disappointment, and thus regarded as a failurea failure that could have been prevented with the right choice.
Contrast this with societies in which marriages are arranged, so people have little control over whom they marry, or societies in which educational opportunities are limited, so people have little control over what they learn.
The key fact about psychological life in societies in which you have little control over these aspects of life is that you also have little expectation of control.
And because of this, I think, lack of control does not lead to feelings of helplessness and depression.
A Rising Individualism and Self-Blame LONG WITH THE PERVASIVE RISE IN EXPECTATIONS , AMERIC AN CUL- ture has also become more individualistic than it was, perhaps as a by-product of the desire to have control over every aspect of life.
To be less individualisticto tie oneself tightly into networks of family, friends, and communityis to be bound, to some degree, by the needs of family, friends, and community.
If our attachments to others are serious, we cant just do whatever we want.
I think the single most difficult negotiation that faces young people who marry in todays America is the one in which the partners decide where their individual autonomy ends and marital obligation and responsibility take over.
Our heightened individualism means that, not only do we expect perfection in all things, but we expect to produce this perfection ourselves.
When we (inevitably) fail, the culture of individualism biases us toward causal explanations that focus on personal rather than universal factors.
And this is just the kind of causal explanation that promotes depression when we are faced with failure.
As a corollary, the modern emphasis on individual autonomy and control may be neutralizing a crucial vaccine against depression: deep commitment and belonging to social groups and institutionsfamilies, civic associations, faith communities, and the like.
So the more we focus on ourselves, the more our connections to others weakens.
And in this context it is relevant that the incidence of depression among the Amish of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, is less than 20 percent of the national rate.
The Amish are a tightly knit traditional community, one in which social ties are extremely strong and life choices are rather meager.
Do the Amish have less control over their lives than the rest of us?
Do they have less control than the rest of us compared to what they expect?
Viewed from within Amish society, where expectations about individual control and autonomy are very different than they are in mainstream America, community membership doesnt entail much in the way of personal sacrifice.
For the Amish, the unease that the rest of us may feel at the prospect of significant communal obligation is largely absent.
By elevating everyones expectations about autonomy and control, Whose Fault Is It?
The distortions incumbent in the desire for control, autonomy, and perfection are nowhere more apparent than in the American obsession with appearance.
The combination of genes and early experience plays a major role in determining what we look like as adults, and virtually all diets tend to produce only short-term changes.
Media and peer pressure tells us that obesity is a matter of choice, personal control, and personal responsibility, that we should aspire to look perfect, and that if we dont, we have only ourselves to blame.
According to the culture, if we had enough discipline and self-control we could combine sensible eating habits and exercise regimes and all look like movie stars.
The illusion that each person can have the body that he or she wants is especially painful for women, and especially in societies, like ours, in which the ideal body is extremely thin.
Cultures that promote the ultrathin ideal for women (for example, Sweden, Great Britain, Czechoslovakia, and white America) have much higher rates of eating disorders (bulimia and anorexia nervosa) than cultures that do not.
Even more significant for the present discussion is that in cultures that adopt the ultrathin ideal, the rate of depression in women is twice that in men.
In cultures that adopt a more reasonable ideal, sex differences in rates of depression are smaller.
The (admittedly speculative) connection between thinness and depression is this: body weight is something people are supposed to 214 | The Paradox of Choice control, and to look perfect is to be thin.
And, as we have come by now to expect, this problem is especially acute for maximizers.
As they do in regard to missed opportunities, regret, adaptation, and social comparison, maximizers will suffer more from high expectations and self-blame than will satisficers.
Maximizers will put the most work into their decisions and have the highest expectations about the results of those decisions, and thus will be the most disappointed.
The research that my colleagues and I have done suggests that, not surprisingly, maximizers are prime candidates for depression.
With group after group of peoplevarying in age, gender, educational level, geographical location, race, and socioeconomic statuswe have found a strong positive relation between maximizing and measures of depression.
Among people who score highest on our Maximization Scale, scores on the standard measure of depression are in the borderline clinical depression range.
We find the same relation between maximizing and depression among young adolescents.
High expectations and taking personal responsibility for failing to meet them can apply to educational decisions, career decisions, and marital decisions, just as they apply to decisions about where to eat.
If the experience of disappointment is relentless, if virtually every choice Whose Fault Is It?
Choice, Disappointment, and Depression | 215 you make fails to live up to expectations and aspirations, and if you consistently take personal responsibility for the disappointments, then the trivial looms larger and larger, and the conclusion that you cant do anything right becomes devastating.
The Psychology of Autonomy and the Ecology of Autonomy P ARADOXIC ALLY, EVEN AT A TIME AND PLACE WHEN EXCESSIVE expectations of and aspirations for control are contributing to an epidemic of depression, those who feel that they have control are in better psychological shape than those who dont.
To understand this, we need to make a distinction between what is good for the individual and what is good for the society as a whole, between the psychology of personal autonomy and the ecology of personal autonomy.
In a study focused on twenty developed Western nations and Japan, Richard Eckersley notes that the factors that seem best correlated with national differences in youth suicide rates involve cultural attitudes toward personal freedom and control.
Those nations whose citizens value personal freedom and control the most tend to have the highest suicide rates.
Eckersley is quick to point out that these same values allow certain individuals within these cultures to thrive and prosper to an extraordinary degree.
The problem is that on the national or ecological level, these same values have a pervasive, toxic effect.
The problem also may be exacerbated by what Robert Lane refers to as hedonic lag.
Lane says that there is a tendency of every culture to persist in valuing the qualities that made it distinctively great long after they have lost their hedonic yield. This, he says, explains a lot of the malaise currently afflicting market democracies. The combination of hedonic lag with the mixture of psycho- A CONSEQUENCE OF TOO MUCH FREEDOM  The New Yorker Collection 1999 Benita Epstein from cartoonbank.com.
Choice, Disappointment, and Depression | 217 logical benefits and ecological costs of the cultures emphasis on autonomy and control makes it extremely difficult for a society to get things right.
Clearly, our experience of choice as a burden rather than a privilege is not a simple phenomenon.
Rather it is the result of a complex interaction among many psychological processes that permeate our culture, including rising expectations, awareness of opportunity costs, aversion to trade-offs, adaptation, regret, self-blame, the tendency to engage in social comparisons, and maximizing.
In the next chapter, we will review and amplify the recommendations weve made throughout the book, exploring what individuals can do, despite societal pressure, to overcome the overload of choice.
We are free to be the authors of our own lives, but we dont know exactly what kind of lives we want to write. The success of modernity turns out to be bittersweet, and everywhere we look it appears that a significant contributing factor is the overabundance of choice.
Having too many choices produces psychological distress, especially when combined with regret, concern about status, adaptation, social comparison, and perhaps most important, the desire to have the best of everythingto maximize.
I believe there are steps we can take to mitigateeven eliminatemany of these sources of distress, but they arent easy.
Choose When to Choose S WE HAVE SEEN, HAVING THE OPPORTUNITY TO CHOOSE IS ESSEN - tial for well-being, but choice has negative features, and the negative features escalate as the number of choices increases.
In other words, it isnt this or that particular choice that creates the problem; its all the choices, taken together.
If the ability to choose enables you to get a better car, house, job, vacation, or coffeemaker, but the process of choice makes you feel worse about what youve chosen, you really havent gained anything from the opportunity to choose.
And much of the time, better objective results and worse subjective results are exactly what our overabundance of options provides.
To manage the problem of excessive choice, we must decide which choices in our lives really matter and focus our time and energy there, letting many other opportunities pass us by.
| 223 Itemize the steps, time, research, and anxiety that went into making those decisions.
This exercise may help you better appreciate the costs associated with the decisions you make, which may lead you to give up some decisions altogether or at least to establish rules of thumb for yourself about how many options to consider, or how much time and energy to invest in choosing.
For example, you could make it a rule to visit no more than two stores when shopping for clothing or to consider no more than two locations when planning a vacation.
The alcohol tastes good and it makes you feel good and the opportunity for another drink is right at your elbow, yet you stop.
One reason is that you get insistent instructions from society about the dangers of too much alcohol.
Unfortunately, there are no insistent instructions from society about shopping too much.
Nor, perhaps, has it been obvious to you that choice overload gives you a hangover.
But if youve been convinced by the arguments and the evidence in this book, you now know that choice has a downside, an awareness that should 224 | The Paradox of Choice make it easier for you to adopt, and live with, a two options is my limit rule.
Be a Chooser, Not a Picker HOOSERS ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE ABLE T O REFLECT ON WHAT MAKES a decision important, on whether, perhaps, none of the options should be chosen, on whether a new option should be created, and on what a particular choice says about the chooser as an individual.
But when faced with overwhelming choice, we are forced to become pickers, which is to say, relatively passive selectors from whatever is available.
Being a chooser is better, but to have the time to choose more and pick less, we must be willing to rely on habits, customs, norms, and rules to make some decisions automatic.
Good decisions take time and attention, and the only way we can find the needed time and attention is by choosing our spots.
As you go through the exercise of reviewing recent choices youve made, not only will you become more aware of associated costs, youll discover that there are some things you really care about, and others you dont.
Satisfice More and Maximize Less T IS MAXIMIZERS WHO SUFFER MOST IN A CULTURE THAT PROVIDES too many choices.
It is maximizers who have expectations that cant be met.
It is maximizers who worry most about regret, about missed opportunities, and about social comparisons, and it is maximizers who are most disappointed when the results of decisions are not as good as they expected.
Learning to accept good enough will simplify decision making and increase satisfaction.
Though satisficers may often do less well than maximizers according to certain objective standards, nonetheless, by settling for good enough even when the best could be just around the corner, satisficers will usually feel better about the decisions they make.
Becoming a conscious, intentional satisficer makes comparison with how other people are doing less important.
It makes regret less likely.
In the complex, choice-saturated world we live in, it makes peace of mind possible.
To become a satisficer, however, requires that you think carefully 226 | The Paradox of Choice about your goals and aspirations, and that you develop well-defined standards for what is good enough whenever you face a decision.
Because I make a fairly large number of longdistance phone calls and because I was being deluged with unsolicited advertisements from various companies, I found it hard to resist the temptation to try to find the absolute best company and plan for my calling habits.
Making the various needed comparisons was difficult, time-consuming, and confusing, because different companies organized their services and charges in different ways.
Ignoring these opportunity costs can lead us to overestimate how good the best option is.
On the other hand, the more we think about opportunity costs, the less satisfaction well derive from whatever we choose.
Given that thinking about the attractiveness of unchosen options will always detract from the satisfaction derived from the chosen one, it is tempting to suggest that we forget about opportunity costs altogether, but often it is difficult or impossible to judge how good an option is except in relation to other options.
What defines a good investment, for example, is to a large degree its rate of return in comparison with other investments.
There is no obvious absolute standard that we can appeal to, so some amount of reflection on opportunity costs is probably essential.
When we decide to opt out of deciding in some area of life, we dont have to think about opportunity costs.
Because satisficers have their own standards for what is good enough, they are less dependent than maximizers on comparison among alternatives.
No need to worry about opportunity costs.
No need to experience the diminution of satisfaction that comes from contemplating all the other things you might have done with the money.
There are some strategies you can use to help you avoid the disappointment that comes from thinking about opportunity costs: 1.
So youll stumble onto improvements on your habitual choices without going looking for them.
When a decision is final, we engage in a variety of psychological processes that enhance our feelings about the choice we made rela- What to Do About Choice | 229 tive to the alternatives.
I think the power of nonreversible decisions comes through most clearly when we think about our most important choices.
A friend once told me how his minister had shocked the congregation with a sermon on marriage in which he said flatly that, yes, the grass is always greener.
But finding a life partner is not a matter of comparison shopping and trading up. The only way to find happiness and stability in the presence of seemingly attractive and tempting options is to say, Im simply not going there.
Knowing that youve made a choice that you will not reverse allows you to pour your energy into improving the relationship that you have rather than constantly second-guessing it.
Practice an Attitude of Gratitude UR EVALUATION OF OUR CHOICES IS PROFOUNDLY AFFECTED BY what we compare them with, including comparisons with alter- natives that exist only in our imaginations.
We can vastly improve our subjective experience by consciously striving to be grateful more often for what is good about a choice or an experience, and to be disappointed less by what is bad about it.
The research literature suggests that gratitude does not come naturally to most of us most of the time.
Usually, thinking about possible alternatives is triggered by dissatisfaction with what was chosen.
It may seem demeaning to accept the idea that experiencing gratitude takes practice.
The answer is that habits of thought die hard.
These objects of gratitude occasionally will be big (a job promotion, a great first date), but most of the time, they will be small (sunlight streaming in through the bedroom window, a kind word from a friend, a piece of swordfish cooked just the way you like it, an informative article in a magazine).
Although regret is often appropriate and instructive, when it becomes so pronounced that it poisons or even prevents decisions, we should make an effort to minimize it.
We can mitigate regret by 1.
Adopting the standards of a satisficer rather than a maximizer.
Practicing gratitude for what is good in a decision rather than focusing on our disappointments with what is bad.
I have a friend, frustrated over his achievements in life, who has wasted countless hours over the past thirty years regretting that he passed up the chance to go to a certain Ivy League college.
But one thing I do know is that his experience of them would be infinitely happier if he could let go of regret.
When life is hard, adaptation enables us to avoid the full brunt of the hardship.
But when life is good, adaptation puts us on a hedonic treadmill, robbing us of the full measure of satisfaction we expect from each positive experience.
We cant prevent adaptation.
What we can do is develop realistic expectations about how experiences change with time.
Learning to be satisfied as pleasures turn into mere comforts will ease disappointment with adaptation when it occurs.
We can also reduce disappointment from adaptation by following the satisficers strategy of spending less time and energy researching and agonizing over decisions.
In addition to being aware of the hedonic treadmill, we should also be wary of the satisfaction treadmill. This is the double whammy of adaptation.
Here the habit of gratitude can be helpful too.
So, to be better prepared for, and less disappointed by adaptation: 1.
Spend less time looking for the perfect thing (maximizing), so that you wont have huge search costs to be amortized against the satisfaction you derive from what you actually choose.
Control Expectations UR EVALUATION OF EXPERIENCE IS SUBSTANTIALLY INFLUENCED BY how it compares with our expectations.
So what may be the eas- iest route to increasing satisfaction with the results of decisions is to remove excessively high expectations about them.
This is easier said than done, especially in a world that encourages high expectations and offers so many choices that it seems only reasonable to believe that some option out there will be perfect.
So to make the task of lowering expectations easier: 1.
Curtail Social Comparison E EVALUATE THE QUALITY OF OUR EXPERIENCES BY COMPARING ourselves to others.
Though social comparison can provide useful information, it often reduces our satisfaction.
So by comparing ourselves to others less, we will be satisfied more.
Stop paying so much attention to how others around you are doing is easy advice to give, but hard advice to follow, because the evidence of how others are doing is pervasive, because most of us seem to care a great deal about status, and finally, because access to some of the most important things in life (for example, the best colleges, the best jobs, the best houses in the best neighborhoods) is granted only to those who do better than their peers.
Nonetheless, social comparison seems sufficiently destructive to our sense of well-being that it is worthwhile to remind ourselves to do it less.
Because it is easier for a satisficer to avoid social comparison than for a maximizer, learning that good enough is good enough may automatically reduce concern with how others are doing.
Following the other suggestions Ive made may sometimes mean that when judged by an absolute standard, the results of decisions will be less good than they might otherwise have beenall the more reason to fight the tendency to make social comparisons.
Learn to Love Constraints S T H E N U M B E R O F C H O I C E S W E FA C E I N C R E A S E S , F R E E D O M O F choice eventually becomes a tyranny of choice.
Routine deci- sions take so much time and attention that it becomes difficult to get through the day.
Society provides rules, standards, and norms for making choices, and individual experience creates habits.
This kind of rule-following frees up time and attention that can be devoted to thinking about choices and decisions to which rules dont apply.
In the short run, thinking about these second-order decisions decisions about when in life we will deliberate and when we will follow predetermined pathsadds a layer of complexity to life.
Without the fishbowl, there truly would be 236 | The Paradox of Choice  The New Yorker Collection 2001 Peter Steiner from cartoonbank.com.
Choice within constraints, freedom within limits, is what enables the little fish to imagine a host of marvelous possibilities.
