ONE While I Was Sleeping Your Highnesses, as Catholic Christians, and princes who love and promote the holy Christian faith, and are enemies of the doctrine of Mahomet, and of all idolatry and heresy, determined to send me, Christopher Columbus, to the above-mentioned countries of India, to see the said princes, people, and territo ries, and to learn their disposition and the proper method of converting them to our holy faith; and furthermore directed that I should not proceed by land to the East, as is customary, but by a Westerly route, in which direction we have hith erto no certain evidence that anyone has gone.
Entry from the journal of Christopher Columbus on his voyage of 1492 N o one ever gave me directions like this on a golf course before: "Aim at either Microsoft or IBM."
I was standing on the first tee at the KGA Golf Club in downtown Bangalore, in southern India, when my playing partner pointed at two shiny glass-and-steel buildings off in the distance, just behind the first green.
The Goldman Sachs building wasn't done yet; otherwise he could have pointed that out as well and made it a threesome.
HP and Texas Instruments had their of fices on the back nine, along the tenth hole.
The tee markers were from Epson, the printer company, and one of our caddies was wearing a hat from 3M.
Outside, some of the traffic signs were also sponsored by Texas Instruments, and the Pizza Hut billboard on the way over showed a steaming pizza, under the headline "Gigabites of Taste!"
It didn't even seem like India.
I had come to Bangalore, India's Silicon Valley, on my own Columbus-like journey of exploration.
Columbus sailed with the Nina, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria in an effort to discover a shorter, more di rect route to India by heading west, across the Atlantic, on what he pre sumed to be an open sea route to the East Indies rather than going south and east around Africa, as Portuguese explorers of his day were try ing to do.
India and the magical Spice Islands of the East were famed at the time for their gold, pearls, gems, and silka source of untold riches.
Finding this shortcut by sea to India, at a time when the Muslim powers of the day had blocked the overland routes from Europe, was a way for both Columbus and the Spanish monarchy to become wealthy and pow erful.
When Columbus set sail, he apparently assumed the earth was round, which was why he was convinced that he could get to India by going west.
Nevertheless, he called the aboriginal peoples he encountered in the new world "Indians."
Returning home, though, Columbus was able to tell his pa trons, King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella, that although he never did find India, he could confirm that the world was indeed round.
I set out for India by going due east, via Frankfurt.
I too encountered people called Indians.
I too was searching for India's riches.
Columbus was happy to make the Indians he met his slaves, a pool of free manual labor.
I just wanted to understand why the Indians I met were taking our work, why they had become such an important pool for the outsourcing of service and information technology work from WHILE I WAS SLEEPING America and other industrialized countries.
Columbus had more than one hundred men on his three ships; I had a small crew from the Discovery Times channel that fit comfortably into two banged-up vans, with Indian drivers who drove barefoot.
When I set sail, so to speak, I too assumed that the world was round, but what I encountered in the real India profoundly shook my faith in that notion.
Columbus accidentally ran into America but thought he had discovered part of India.
I actually found India and thought many of the people I met there were Ameri cans.
I guess you could say it all started in Nandan Nilekani's conference room at Infosys Technologies Limited.
Infosys is one of the jewels of the Indian information technology world, and Nilekani, the company's CEO, is one of the most thoughtful and respected captains of Indian industry.
I drove with the Discovery Times crew out to the Infosys campus, about forty minutes from the heart of Bangalore, to tour the facility and interview Nilekani.
The Infosys campus is reached by a pockmarked road, with sacred cows, horse-drawn carts, and motorized rickshaws all jostling alongside our vans.
Once you enter the gates of Infosys, though, you are in a different world.
In some of those buildings, Infosys employees are writing specific software pro grams for American or European companies; in others, they are running the back rooms of major American- and European-based multinationals everything from computer maintenance to specific research projects to THE WORLD IS FLAT answering customer calls routed there from all over the world.
Young Indian engineers, men and women, walk briskly from building to building, dangling ID badges.
After sitting for an interview, Nilekani gave our T V crew a tour of Infosys's global conferencing centerground zero of the Indian out sourcing industry.
Infosys, he said, can hold a virtual meeting of the key players from its entire global supply chain for any project at any time on that supersize screen.
So their American designers could be on the screen speaking with their Indian software writers and their Asian manufactur ers all at once.
And maybe the implementation is in Singapore, so the Singapore person could also be live here .
Above the screen there were eight clocks that pretty well summed up the Infosys workday: 24/7/365.
The clocks were labeled US West, US East, GMT, India, Singapore, Hong Kong, Japan, Australia.
"What hap pened over the last [few] years is that there was a massive investment in technology, especially in the bubble era, when hundreds of millions of dollars were invested in putting broadband connectivity around the world, undersea cables, all those things."
At the same time, he added, computers became cheaper and dispersed all over the world, and there was an explosion of softwaree-mail, search engines like Google, and proprietary software that can chop up any piece of work and send one WHILE I WAS SLEEPING part to Boston, one part to Bangalore, and one part to Beijing, making it easy for anyone to do remote development.
He meant that countries like India are now able to compete for global knowledge work as never beforeand that America had better get ready for this.
As I left the Infosys campus that evening and bounced along the road back to Bangalore, I kept chewing on that phrase: "The playing field is being leveled."
Here I was in Bangaloremore than five hundred years after Columbus sailed over the horizon, using the rudimentary navigational technologies of his day, and returned safely to prove definitively that the world was roundand one of India's smartest engineers, trained at his country's top technical institute and backed by the most modern tech nologies of his day, was essentially telling me that the world was flatas flat as that screen on which he can host a meeting of his whole global supply chain.
Even more interesting, he was citing this development as a good thing, as a new milestone in human progress and a great opportu nity for India and the worldthe fact that we had made our world flat!
Clearly Nandan was right: It is now possible for more people than ever to collaborate and compete in real time with more other people on more different kinds of work from more different corners of the planet and on a more equal footing than at any previous time in the history of the worldusing computers, e-mail, fiber-optic networks, teleconferencing, and dynamic new software.
That was what I discovered on my journey to India and beyond.
But I was also excited personally, because what the flattening of the world means is that we are now connecting all the knowledge centers on the planet together into a single global network, whichif politics and terrorism do not get in the waycould usher in an amazing era of prosperity, innovation, and collaboration, by companies, communities, and individuals.
It's also alQaeda and other terrorist networks.
But after 9/11, the olive tree wars became allconsuming for me.
The second great era, Globalization 2.0, lasted roughly from 1800 to 2000, interrupted by the Great Depression and World Wars I and II.
In Global ization 2.0, the key agent of change, the dynamic force driving global integration, was multinational companies.
These multinationals went global for markets and labor, spearheaded first by the expansion of the Dutch and English joint-stock companies and the Industrial Revolution.
In the first half of this era, global integration was powered by falling trans portation costs, thanks to the steam engine and the railroad, and in the second half by falling telecommunication coststhanks to the diffusion of the telegraph, telephones, the PC, satellites, fiber-optic cable, and the early version of the World Wide Web.
Remember, when Bill Clinton was elected president in 1992, virtually no one outside of government and the academy had e-mail, and when I was writing The Lexus and the Olive Tree in 1998, the Internet and e-commerce were just taking off.
And while the dy namic force in Globalization 1.0 was countries globalizing and the dy namic force in Globalization 2.0 was companies globalizing, the dynamic force in Globalization 3.0the force that gives it its unique characteris the newfound power for individuals to collaborate and compete globally.
Just a hint: The flat-world platform is the product of a convergence of the personal computer (which allowed every individual suddenly to become the author of his or her own content in digital form) with fiber-optic cable (which suddenly allowed all those individ uals to access more and more digital content around the world for next to nothing) with the rise of work flow software (which enabled individ- WHILE I WAS SLEEPING uals all over the world to collaborate on that same digital content from anywhere, regardless of the distances between them).
Even though China actually had the biggest economy in the world in the eigh teenth century, it was Western countries, companies, and explorers who were doing most of the globalizing and shaping of the system.
(While this empowerment of individuals to act globally is the most important new feature of Globalization 3.0, companieslarge and smallhave been newly empowered in this era as well.
But as I sat contemplating these changes on the balcony of my hotel room that evening, I did know one thing: I wanted to drop everything and write a book that would enable me to understand how this flattening process happened and what its im plications might be for countries, companies, and individuals.
Let me start by taking you back to the beginning of my journey to India, and other points east, and share with you some of the encounters that led me to conclude the world was no longer roundbut flat.
J err aithirth " J y " Rao was one of the first people I met in Bangalore, and I hadn't been with him for more than a few minutes at the Leela Palace hotel before he told me that he could handle my tax returns and any other accounting needs I hadfrom Bangalore.
He was too polite to say itthat he may already be my accountant, or rather my accountant's accountant, thanks to the explosion in the outsourcing of tax preparation.
"This is happening as we speak," said Rao, a native of Mumbai, for merly Bombay, whose Indian firm, MphasiS, has a team of Indian ac countants able to do outsourced accounting work from any state in America and the federal government.
Rao's company has pioneered a work flow software program with a standardized format that makes the outsourcing of tax re turns cheap and easy.
The whole process starts, Jerry explained, with an accountant in the United States scanning my last year's tax returns, plus my W-2, W-4, 1099, bonuses, and stock statementseverythinginto a computer server, which is physically located in California or Texas.
"Now your accountant, if he is going to have your taxes done overseas, knows that you would prefer not to have your surname be known or your Social Security number known [to someone outside the country], so he can choose to suppress that information," said Rao.
"The accountants in India call up all the raw information directly from the server in America [using a password], and they complete your tax returns, with you re- WHILE I WAS SLEEPING maining anonymous.
The accountant in India can see the data on his screen, but he cannot take a download of it or print it outour program does not allow it.
I was intrigued at just how advanced this form of service outsourcing had become.
They can be sitting on a beach in California and e-mail us and say, 'Jerry, you are really good at doing New York State returns, so you do Tom's returns.
Sonia, by the way, is working out of her house in India, with no overhead [for the company to pay].
" In 2003, some 25,000 U.S. tax returns were done in India.
"My friend Jeroen Tas, a Dutchman, and I were both working in Cal ifornia for Citigroup," Rao explained.
So in 1997-98, we put together a business plan to provide high-end Internet solutions for big companies... Two years ago, though, I went to a technology convention in Las Vegas and was ap proached by some medium-size [American] accounting firms, and they said they could not afford to set up big tax outsourcing operations in India, but the big guys could, and [the medium guys] wanted to get ahead of them.
So we developed a software product called VTR Virtual Tax Roomto enable these medium-size accounting firms to easily outsource tax returns."
Judging from an essay in the journal Accounting Today (June 7, 2004), this does, indeed, seem to be the future.
The primary reason that the industry has been able to scale up as rapidly as it has over the past three years is due to the investment that these [foreign-based] companies have made in systems, processes and training."
There are about seventy thousand accounting grads in India each year, he added, many of whom go to work for local Indian firms starting at $100 a month.
With the help of high-speed communi cations, stringent training, and standardized forms, these young Indians can fairly rapidly be converted into basic Western accountants at a frac tion of the cost.
Some of the Indian accounting firms even go about mar keting themselves to American firms through teleconferencing and skip the travel.
Concluded Boomer, "The accounting profession is currently in transformation.
Those who get caught in the past and resist change WHILE I WAS SLEEPING will be forced deeper into commoditization.
Those who can create value through leadership, relationships and creativity will transform the indus try, as well as strengthen relationships with their existing clients."
It's easy to predict for someone living in India.
He was full of energy.
He told me he'd been talking to an Israeli company that is making some big advances in compression technology to allow for easier, better transfers of CAT scans via the Internet so you can quickly get a second opinion from a doctor half a world away.
A few weeks after I spoke with Rao, the following e-mail arrived from Bill Brody, the president of Johns Hopkins University, whom I had just interviewed for this book: Dear Tom, I am speaking at a Hopkins continuing education med ical meeting for radiologists (I used to be a radiologist)...
I have just learned that in many small and some medium-size hos pitals in the US, radiologists are outsourcing reading of CAT scans to doctors in India and Australia!!!
The advantage is that it is daytime in Australia or India when it is nighttime hereso after-hours coverage becomes more readily done by shipping the images across the globe.
The groups abroad that provide these after-hours readings are called "Nighthawks" by the American radiologists that employ them.
There will be no outsourcing for me  even if some of my read ers wish my column could be shipped off to North Korea.
Then I heard about the Reuters operation in India.
I didn't have time to visit the Reuters office in Bangalore, but I was able to get hold of Tom Glocer, the C E O of Reuters, to hear what he was doing.
Glocer is a pioneer in the outsourcing of elements of the news supply chain.
With 2,300 journalists around the world, in 197 bureaus, serving a market including investment bankers, derivatives traders, stockbrokers, newspapers, radio, television, and Internet outlets, Reuters has always had a very complex audience to satisfy.
After the dot-com bust, though, when many of its customers became very cost-conscious, Reuters started asking itself, for reasons of both cost and efficiency: Where do we actu ally need our people to be located to feed our global news supply chain?
And can we actually disaggregate the work of a journalist and keep part in London and New York and shift part to India?
Glocer started by looking at the most basic bread-and-butter function Reuters provides, which is breaking news about company earnings and related business developments, every second of every day.
"Exxon comes out with its earnings and we need to get that as fast as possible up on screens around the world: 'Exxon earned thirty-nine cents this quarter as opposed to thirty-six cents last quarter.'
The flash should be out in seconds after the company releases, and the table [showing the recent history of quarterly earnings] a few seconds later."
The dot-com bust and the flattening of the world forced Glocer to re think how Reuters delivered newswhether it could disaggregate the functions of a journalist and ship the low-value-added functions to India.
His primary goal was to reduce the overlap Reuters payroll, while pre serving as many good journalism jobs as possible.
These new Indian hires had accounting backgrounds and were trained by Reuters, but they were paid standard local wages and vacation and health benefits.
"India is an unbelievably rich place for recruiting people, not only with technical skills but also financial skills," said Glocer.
When a company puts out its earnings, one of the first things it does is hand it to the wiresReuters, Dow Jones, and Bloombergfor distribution.
While economics and the flattening of the world have pushed Reuters down this path, Glocer has tried to make a virtue of necessity.
"We think we can off-load commoditized reporting and get that done ef ficiently somewhere else in the world," he said, and then give the con ventional Reuters journalists, whom the company is able to retain, a chance to focus on doing much higher-value-added and personally ful filling journalism and analysis.
"Let's say you were a Reuters journalist in New York.
Outsourcing news bulletins to India also allows Reuters to extend the breadth of its reporting to more small-cap compa nies, companies it was not cost-efficient for Reuters to follow before with higher-paid journalists in New York.
But with lower-wage Indian re porters, who can be hired in large numbers for the cost of one reporter in New York, it can now do that from Bangalore.
By the summer of 2004, Reuters had grown its Bangalore content operation to three hundred staff, aiming eventually for a total of fifteen hundred.
Some of those are Reuters veterans sent out to train the Indian teams, some are reporters fil ing earnings flashes, but most are journalists doing slightly more special ized data analysisnumber crunchingfor securities offerings.
In the wake of New York State attorney general Eliot Spitzer's investigations into Wall Street practices, following several scandals, investment banking and stockbrokerage have had to be distinctly separatedso that analysts will stop hyping companies in order to get their investment banking.
In addition to being able to pay an analyst in Bangalore about $15,000 in total compensation, as opposed to $80,000 in New York or London, Reuters has found that its India employees tend to be financially literate and highly motivated as well.
Reuters also recently opened a software de velopment center in Bangkok because it turned out to be a good place to recruit developers who had been overlooked by all the Western compa nies vying for talent in Bangalore.
Having started my career as a wire ser vice reporter with United Press International, I have enormous sympathy with wire service reporters and the pressures, both professional and fi nancial, under which they toil.
"It is delicate with the staff," said Glocer, who has cut the entire Reuters staff by roughly a quarter, without deep cuts among the re porters.
The Reuters staff, he said, understand that this is being done so that the company can survive and then thrive again.
For them, retraining and an adequate social safety net are needed."
In an effort to deal straight with the Reuters staff, David Schlesinger, who is now the company's global managing editor, sent all editorial em ployees a memo, which included the following excerpt: O F F - S H O R I N G WITH O B L I G A T I O N I grew up in New London, Connecticut, which in the 19th century was a major whaling center.
My class mates' parents worked at Electric Boat, the Navy and the Coast Guard.
The peace dividend changed the region once again, and now it is best known for the great gambling casinos of Mohegan Sun and Foxwoods and for the pharmaceutical researchers of Pfizer.
How many mill towns saw their WHILE I WAS SLEEPING mills close; how many shoe towns saw the shoe industry move elsewhere; how many towns that were once textile powerhouses now buy all their linens from China?
The current debate about offshoring is dangerously hot.
But the debate about work going to India, China and Mexico is actually no different from the debate once held about submarine work leaving New London or shoe work leaving Massachusetts or textile work leaving North Carolina.
o you know what an Indian call center sounds like?
While filming the documentary about outsourcing, the T V crew and I spent an evening at the Indian-owned "24/7 Customer" call center in Bangalore.
The calls are transferred here by satellite and un dersea fiber-optic cable.
So one corner might be the Dell group, another might be flying the flag of Microsoft.
I was wandering around the Microsoft section around six p.m. Bangalore time, when most of these young people start their workday to coincide with the dawn in America, when I asked a young Indian com puter expert there a simple question: What was the record on the floor for the longest phone call to help some American who got lost in the maze of his or her own software?
Here is a small sample of what we heard that night while filming for Discovery Times.
It should be read, if you can imagine this, in the voice of someone with an Indian accent trying to imitate an American or a Brit.
Also imagine that no matter how rude, unhappy, ir ritated, or ornery the voices are on the other end of the line, these young Indians are incessantly and unfailingly polite.
WHILE I WAS SLEEPING Woman call center operator: "Good afternoon, may I speak with .
(The Indian call center operators adopt Western names of their own choosing.
Most of the young Indians I talked to about this were not offended but took it as an opportunity to have some fun.
Woman operator in Bangalore getting an American's identity num ber: "May I have the last four digits of your Social Security?"
Woman operator in Bangalore after walking an American through a computer glitch: "Not a problem, Mr. Jassup.
Woman operator in Bangalore after someone has just slammed down the phone on her: "Hello?
T here are currently about 245,000 Indians answering phones from all over the world or dialing out to solicit people for credit cards or cell phone bargains or overdue bills.
These call center jobs are low-wage, low-prestige jobs in America, but when shitted to India they become high-wage, high-prestige jobs.
We are supposed to tell the truth, [so] we tell them India.
Some thought it was Indiana, not India!
Some did not know where India is.
I said it is the country next to Pakistan."
Therefore, the total cost of each call center operator is actually around $500 per month when they start out and closer to $600 to $700 per month after six months.
"It is quite common in India for people to pursue education through their twentiesself-improvement is a big theme and actively encouraged by parents and companies.
We sponsor an MBA program for consistent performers [with] full-day classes over the weekend.
The primary clients that we are re cruiting [for] today are Honeywell.
(This is Indian lingo for their equivalents of GPA and SAT scores.)
The next step for those applicants who are hired at a call center is the training program, which they are paid to attend.
These are daylong sessions with a language teacher WHILE I WAS SLEEPING who prepares the new Indian hires to disguise their pronounced Indian accents when speaking English and replace them with American, Cana dian, or British ones depending on which part of the world they will be speaking with.
Their teacher, a charming eight-months-pregnant young woman dressed in a traditional Indian sari, moved seamlessly among British, American, and Canadian accents as she demonstrated reading a para graph designed to highlight phonetics.
But before you disparage it, you have to taste just how hungry these kids are to escape the lower end of the middle class and move up.
"This is a high-stress environment," said Nilekani, the C E O of Infosys, which also runs a big call center.
Like any explosion of modernity, outsourcing is challenging traditional norms and ways of life.
But educated Indians have been held back so many years by both poverty and a socialist bu reaucracy that many of them seem more than ready to put up with the hours.
In the flat world they can stay in India, make a decent salary, and not have to be away from families, friends, food, and culture.
At the end of the day, these new jobs actually allow them to be more Indian.
So I still get my rice and sambar [a tradi tional Indian dish], which I eat.
I still continue with my Indian food and I still work for a multinational.
When you look around at 24/7's call center, you see that all the computers are running Microsoft Windows.
The chips are designed by Intel.
The air-conditioning is by Carrier, and even the bottled water is by Coke.
This explains why, although the United States has lost some service jobs to India in recent years, total exports from American-based companiesmerchandise and services to India have grown from $2.5 billion in 1990 to $5 billion in 2003.
So even with the outsourcing of some service jobs from the United States to India, India's growing economy is creating a demand for many more American goods and services.
N ine years ago, when Japan was beating America's brains out in the auto industry, I wrote a column about playing the computer geog raphy game Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?
And without missing a beat she answered, "Japan."
Well, I was reminded of that story while visiting Global Edge, an Indian software design firm in Bangalore.
As soon as Mr. Rao introduced himself as calling from an Indian software firm, the U.S. exec utive said to him, "Namaste," a common Hindi greeting.
So now I wonder: If I have a granddaughter one day, and I tell her I'm going to India, will she say, "Grandpa, is that where software comes from?"
Each of these phases is specialized and unique, and neither India nor China nor Russia has a critical mass of talent that can handle the whole product cycle for a big American multinational.
As that continues, we really will see the beginning of what Satyam Cherukuri, of Sarnoff, an American research and development firm, has called "the globaliza tion of innovation" and an end to the old model of a single American or European multinational handling all the elements of the product devel opment cycle from its own resources.
More and more American and European companies are outsourcing significant research and develop ment tasks to India, Russia, and China.
According to the information technology office of the state govern ment in Karnataka, where Bangalore is located, Indian units of Cisco Systems, Intel, IBM, Texas Instruments, and G E have already filed a thousand patent applications with the U.S. Patent Office.
Texas Instru ments alone has had 225 U.S. patents awarded to its Indian operation.
"The Intel team in Bangalore is developing microprocessor chips for high-speed broadband wireless technology, to be launched in 2006," the Karnataka IT office said, in a statement issued at the end of 2004, and "at GE's John F. Welch Technology Centre in Bangalore, engineers are de veloping new ideas for aircraft engines, transport systems and plastics."
Indeed, G E over the years has frequently transferred Indian engineers who worked for it in the United States back to India to integrate its whole global research effort.
G E now even sends non-Indians to Bangalore.
Vivek Paul is the president of Wipro Technologies, another of the elite Indian technology companies, but he is based in Silicon Valley to be close to Wipro s American customers.
At the time he had a French colleague who managed GE's power generator business for the scanners out of France.
"I ran into him on an airplane recently," said Paul, "and he told me he had moved to India to head up GE's high-energy research there."
I told Vivek that I love hearing an Indian who used to head up GE's C T business in Milwaukee but now runs Wipro's consulting business in WHILE I WAS SLEEPING Silicon Valley tell me about his former French colleague who has moved to Bangalore to work for GE.
After stepping down from that post in 2003, he started a company called B2K, with a division called Brickwork, which offers busy global executives their own personal assistant in India.
Your "remote executive assistant" in India, provided by Brickwork, will do all the research for you, create the PowerPoint presentation, and e-mail the whole thing to you overnight so that it is on your desk the day you have to deliver it.
"Because of the time difference with India, they can work on it while you sleep and have it back in your morning."
Kulkarni suggested I hire a re mote assistant in India to do all the research for this book.
Having your own personal remote executive assistant costs around $1,500 to $2,000 a month, and given the pool of Indian college grads from which Brickwork can recruit, the brainpower you can hire dollarfor-dollar is substantial.
As Brickwork's promotional material says, "India's talent pool provides companies access to a broad spectrum of highly qualified people.
India's business schools, it adds, produce around eighty-nine thousand MBAs per year.
The other, he said, are American investment banks and fi nancial services companies, which often need to prepare glossy pam phlets with graphs to illustrate the benefits of an IPO or a proposed merger.
In the case of a merger, Brickwork will prepare those sections of the report dealing with general market conditions and trends, where most of the research can be gleaned off the Web and summarized in a standard format.
They are full of ambition to do their higher problem solving as well, said Kulkarni.
U nlike Columbus, I didn't stop with India.
So after India, I was soon off to Tokyo, where I had a chance to in terview Kenichi Ohmae, the legendary former McKinsey & Company consultant in Japan.
He is now spearheading a drive to outsource low-end Japanese jobs to Japanese-speaking call centers and service providers in China.
"To China?
Didn't the Japanese once colonize China, leaving a very bad taste in the mouths of the Chinese?"
Well, yes, said Ohmae, but he explained that the Japanese also left be hind a large number of Japanese speakers who have maintained a slice of Japanese culture, from sushi to karaoke, in northeastern China, particu larly around the northeastern port city of Dalian.
Dalian has become for WHILE I WAS SLEEPING Japan what Bangalore has become for America and the other Englishspeaking countries: outsourcing central.
The Chinese may never forgive Japan for what it did to China in the last century, but the Chinese are so focused on leading the world in the next century that they are ready to brush up on their Japanese and take all the work Japan can outsource.
"About onethird of the people in this region [around Dalian] have taken Japanese as a second language in high school.
So all of these Japanese companies are coming in."
Ohmae's company is doing primarily data-entry work in China, where Chinese workers take handwritten Japanese documents, which are scanned, faxed, or e-mailed over from Japan to Dalian, and then type them into a digital database in Japanese characters.
Ohmae's company has developed a software program that takes the data to be entered and breaks it down into packets.
These packets can then be sent around China or Japan for typing, depending on the specialty required, and then reassem bled at the company's database in its Tokyo headquarters.
The firm has recently expanded into computer-aided de signs for a Japanese housing company.
"When you negotiate with the cus tomer in Japan for building a house," he explained, "you would sketch out a floor planmost of these companies don't use computers."
So the handdrawn plans are sent electronically to China, where they are converted into digital designs, which then are e-mailed back to the Japanese building firm, which turns them into manufacturing blueprints.
Chinese doing computer drawings for Japanese homes, nearly sev enty years after a rapacious Japanese army occupied China, razing many homes in the process.
needed to see Dalian, this Bangalore of China, firsthand, so I kept moving around the East.
Dalian, which is located about an hour's flight northeast of Beijing, sym bolizes how rapidly China's most modern citiesand there are still plenty of miserable, backward onesare grabbing business as knowledge centers, not just as manufacturing hubs.
The signs on the buildings tell the whole story: G E , Microsoft, Dell, SAP, HP, Sony, and Accentureto name but a fewall are having backroom work done here to support their Asian operations, as well as new software research and development.
Because of its proximity to Japan and Korea, each only about an hour away by air, its large number of Japanese speakers, its abundance of Internet bandwidth, and many parks and a world-class golf course (all of which appeal to knowledge workers), Dalian has become an attractive locus for Japanese outsourcing.
Japanese firms can hire three Chinese software engineers for the price of one in Japan and still have change to pay a roomful of call center operators ($90 a month starting salary).
No wonder some twenty-eight hundred Japanese companies have set up op erations here or teamed up with Chinese partners.
"I've taken a lot of American people to Dalian, and they are amazed at how fast the China economy is growing in this high-tech area," said Win Liu, director of U.S./EU projects for DHC, one of Dalian's biggest homegrown software firms, which has expanded from thirty to twelve hundred employees in six years.
Dalian's dynamic mayor, Xia Deren, forty-nine, is a former college president.
(For a Communist authoritarian system, China does a pretty good job of promoting people on merit.
"We have twenty-two universities and col leges with over two hundred thousand students in Dalian," he explained.
More than half those students graduate with engineering or science de grees, and even those who don't, those who study history or literature, are WHILE I WAS SLEEPING still being directed to spend a year studying Japanese or English, plus computer science, so that they will be employable.
The mayor estimated that more than half the residents of Dalian had access to the Internet at the office, home, or school.
"The Japanese enterprises originally started some data-processing in dustries here," the mayor added, "and with this as a base they have now moved to R & D and software development...
In the past one or two years, the software companies of the U.S. are also making some attempts to move outsourcing of software from the U.S. to our city .
We are ap proaching and we are catching up with the Indians.
And China is now becoming the country that develops the largest number of university graduates.
Though in general our English is not as competent as that of the Indian people, we have a bigger population, [so] we can pick out the most intelligent students who can speak the best English."
Are Dalian residents bothered by working for the Japanese, whose government has still never formally apologized for what the wartime Japanese government did to China?
"We will never forget that a historical war occurred between the two nations," he answered, "but when it comes to the field of economy, we only focus on the economic problemsespecially if we talk about the software outsourcing business.
If the U.S. and Japanese companies make their products in our city, we consider that to be a good thing.
Our youngsters are trying to learn Japanese, to master this tool so they can compete with their Japanese counterparts to successfully land highsalary positions for themselves in the future."
The mayor then added for good measure, "My personal feeling is that Chinese youngsters are more ambitious than Japanese or American youngsters in recent years, but I don't think they are ambitious enough, because they are not as ambitious as my generation.
Because our gener ation, before they got into university and colleges, were sent to distant rural areas and factories and military teams, and went through a very hard time, so in terms of the spirit to overcome and face the hardships, [our generation had to have more ambition] than youngsters nowadays."
In manufacturing, he pointed out, "Chinese people first were the employees and working for the big foreign manufacturers, and after several years, after we have learned all the processes and steps, we can start our own firms.
First we will have our young people employed by the foreigners, and then we will start our own companies.
I worked for the state government and I retired, and [after a little while] I thought I have to do something else and I just love it."
He calls it "homesourcing."
A few months later I visited Neeleman at JetBlue's headquarters in New York, and he explained to me the virtues of homesourcing, which he actually started at Morris Air, his first venture in the airline business.
"We had 250 people in their homes doing reservations at Morris Air," said Neeleman.
So he based his home reservations system in Salt Lake City, where the vast majority of the women are Mormons and many are stay-at-home mothers.
"We will never outsource to India," said Neeleman.
[Employers] are more willing to out source to India than to their own homes, and I can't understand that.
The productivity we get here more than makes up for the India [wage] factor."
A Los Angeles Times story about JetBlue (May 9, 2004) noted that "in 1997, 11.6 million employees of U.S. companies worked from home at least part of the time.
In some eyes, homesourcing and outsourcing aren't so much competing strategies as they are different manifestations of the same thing: a relentless push by corporate America to lower costs and increase efficiency, wherever that may lead."
That is exactly what I was learning on my own travels: Homesourcing to Salt Lake City and outsourcing to Bangalore were just flip sides of the same coinsourcing.
And the new, new thing, I was also learning, is the degree to which it is now possible for companies and individuals to source work anywhere.
In the fall of 2004,1 accompanied the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Richard Myers, on a tour of hot spots in Iraq.
The makeshift 24th MEU base is a sort of Fort Apache, in the middle of a pretty hostile Iraqi Sunni Muslim population.
Meanwhile, the video images it was beaming back were being watched simultaneously by the 24th MEU, United States Central Command headquarters in Tampa, CentCom regional head quarters in Qatar, in the Pentagon, and probably also at the CIA.
Nick told me he was at CentCom headquarters in Qatar in April 2004, being briefed by General John Abizaid and his staff.
For instance, Forrester Research, Inc., was projecting that more than three million service and professional jobs would move out of the country by 2015.
But my jaw really dropped when I read a July 19, 2004, article from the International Herald Tribune headlined: "Want Fries With Outsourcing?"
Even some restaurant jobs, it seems, are not immune to outsourcing.
"Jim Sappington, a McDonald's vice president for infor mation technology, said that it was way, way too early' to tell if the call center idea would work across the thirteen thousand McDonald's restau rants in the United States.
Tests conducted by outside companies found that Bigari's drive-throughs now make mistakes on fewer than 2 percent of all orders, down from about 4 percent before he started us ing the call centers, Bigari said."
And I kept going east, right to my living room, where one day Ann, my wife, who is afirst-gradereading teacher, pointed out to me an article about how American kids and parents are now turning to Indians for online tutoring.
An October 2005 Associated Press report from Cochin, India, tells the whole story: A few stars are still twinkling in the inky pre-dawn sky when Koyampurath Namitha arrives for work in a quiet suburb of this south Indian city.
The high school freshman puts on a headset with a microphone and clicks on computer software that will link him through the Internet to his tutor, Namitha, many time zones away.
It's called e-tutoringyet another example of how modern communications, and an abundance of educated, low-wage Asians, are broadening the boundaries of outsourcing and work ing their way into the minutiae of American life, from replacing your lost credit card through reading your CAT scan to helping you revive your crashed computer.
Princeton is one of thousands of U.S. high school students turning to tutors in India.
Namitha works for a company called Growing Stars, based in Cochin and Fremont, California.
The first e-tutoring businesses started less than three years ago, and already thousands of Indian teachers coach U.S. students in math, science or English for about $15 to $20 an hour, a fraction of the $40 to $100 that private tutoring costs in the United States... Princeton's mother, Bessy Piusten, is pleased with the results, saying her children have been getting all A's and B's since they started online tutoring about two years ago .
One afternoon in the fall of 2005 I walked over to interview the U.S. trade representative, Ambassador Rob Portman, whose aide, Amy M. Wilkinson, a White House fellow, told me the most unusual flat-world story.
The United States and Oman had just completed negotiations on a free-trade agreement to eliminate tariffs and trade barriers between the two nations.
What was unusual, though, was that Portman sealed the deal via a vidoconfrence with THE WORLD IS FLAT Maqbool Bin Ali Sultan, Oman's minister of commerce and industry, who participated virtually from Muscat, the country's capital.
Then the crossover began when a U.S. re porter asked both Ambassador Portman and Minister Maqbool Bin Ali Sultan a question together.
WHILE I WAS SLEEPING I loved that concept of a company with only two offices"everywhere, and right next to you" because it captured perfectly the way the flat tening of the world allows companies to be more global than ever and, yet, at the same time, more personal than ever.
A month before the 2004 election I had appeared on the CBS News Sunday morning show Face the Nation, hosted by veteran correspondent Bob Schieffer.
CBS had been in the news a lot in previ ous weeks because of Dan Rather's 60 Minutes report about President George W. Bush's Air National Guard service that turned out to be based on bogus documents.
What's perhaps more startling is how well Mr. Schieffer thought on his feet, after being jumped on by some stranger with interview questions.
"Independent jour nalism and its relative, blogging, are expressions of market forcesa need is not being met by current information sources.
I interviewed the first forensics expert in the Dan Rather National Guard story, and he was then specifically picked up by The Washington Post, Chicago Sun-Times, Globe, NYT, etc., within forty-eight hours.
"It wasn't just that CBS News 'stonewalled' after the fact, it was arguably that they couldn't keep up with an army of dedicated fact-checkers.
I was shuffling through the June 25, 2005, edition of the Financial Times when a headline caught my eye: "Google Lures More Talent."
The article seemed straightforward enough, detail ing how Google had managed to hire legendary technologist Louis Monier away from eBay, where he was heading advanced technology.
But I was brought up short by a paragraph in the middle of the article: "Mr. Monier revealed his motives [for leaving eBay] in an e-mail ex change with blogger John Battelle, who spread the news on his website, battellemedia.com."
In other words, a top blogger whose expertise is Google broke the story, and the giant Financial Times had to quote his one-man Web site to be on top of the story itself.
I offer the Schieffer-Ardolino and Financial Times cases as just two examples of how the flattening of the world has happened faster and changed rules, roles, and relationships more quickly than social science can capture.
The gains in productivity will be staggering for those countries, companies, and individuals who can absorb the new technological tools.
And we are entering a phase where more people than ever before in the history of the world are going to have access to these toolsas innovators, as collaborators, and, alas, even as terrorists.
Everywhere you turn, hierarchies are being challenged from below or are transforming themselves from topdown structures into more horizontal and collaborative ones. "
It is not simply about how governments, business, and people com municate, not just about how organizations interact, but is about the emergence of completely new social, political, and business models.
"It is about things that impact some of the deepest, most ingrained aspects of society right down to the nature of the social contract," added Rothkopf.
I am convinced that the flattening of the world, if it continues, will be seen in time as one of those fundamental shifts or inflection points, like Gutenberg's invention of the printing press, the rise of the nation-state, or the Industrial Revolutioneach of which, in its day, noted Rothkopf, produced changes in the role of individuals, the role and form of gov ernments, the ways business was done and wars were fought, the role of women, the forms religion and art took, and the way science and re search were conducted, not to mention the political labels that we as a civilization have assigned to ourselves and to our enemies.
The introduction of printing happened over a period of decades and for a long time affected only a relatively small part of the planet.
Same with the Industrial Revolution.
To put it another way, the experiences of the high-tech companies in the last few decades that failed to navigate the rapid changes brought about in their marketplace by these types of forces may be a warning to all the businesses, institutions, and nation-states that are now facing these inevitable, even predictable, changes but lack the leadership, flexibility, and imagination to adaptnot because they are not smart or aware, but because the speed of change is simply overwhelming them.
It is the ambition of this book to offer a framework for how to think about this task and manage it to our maximum benefit.
The world has been flattened by the convergence of ten major political events, innovations, and companies.
Secretary Baker was making his first visit to see this crumbled monument to Soviet communism.
But as I peered through a crack in the Wall [near the Reichstag] and saw the high-resolution drabness that characterizes East Berlin, I realized that the ordinary men and women of East Germany, peacefully and persistently, had taken matters into their own hands.
The fall of the Berlin Wall on 11/9/89 unleashed forces that ulti mately liberated all the captive peoples of the Soviet Empire.
The Cold War had been a struggle be tween two economic systemscapitalism and communismand with the fall of the wall, there was only one system left and everyone had to orient himself or herself to it one way or another.
Within two years, there was no Soviet Empire to hide behind anymore or to prop up auto cratic regimes in Asia, the Middle East, Africa, or Latin America.
In fact, there was no better system in the world for that than communism.
Capitalism made people unequally rich, and for some who were used to the plodding, limited, but secure Socialist lifestylewhere a job, a house, an education, and a pension were all THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD guaranteed, even if they were meagerthe fall of the Berlin Wall was deeply unsettling.
That is why the fall of the Berlin Wall was felt in so many more places than just Berlin, and why its fall was such a world-flattening event.
Indeed, to appreciate the far-reaching flattening effects of the fall of the Berlin Wall, it's always best to talk to non-Germans or non-Russians.
Tarun Das was heading the Confederation of Indian Industry when the wall fell in Berlin, and he saw its ripple effect felt all the way to India.
"Nehru had come to power [after the end of British colonial rule] and had a huge country to manage, and no experience of running a country.
The U.S. was busy with Europe and Japan and the Marshall Plan.
The entire infrastructure from 1947 to 1991 was government-owned .
We were not able to pay our debts... Sure, we might have won a couple of wars with Pakistan, but that did not give the nation confidence."
In 1991, with India running out of hard currency, Manmohan Singh, the finance minister at that time (and now the prime minister), decided that India had to open its economy.
Well, three years later [after the 1991 reforms] we were at 7 percent rate of growth.
To hell with poverty!
Now to make it you could stay in India and become one of Forbes s richest people in the world .
All the years of socialism and controls had taken us downhill to the point where we had only $1 billion in foreign currency.
We went from quiet self-confidence to outrageous ambition in a decade."
The fall of the Berlin Wall didn't just help flatten the alternatives to free-market capitalism and unlock enormous pent-up energies for hun dreds of millions of people in places like India, Brazil, China, and the former Soviet Empire.
Amartya Sen, the Nobel Prize-winning Indian economist now teaching at Harvard, once remarked to me that "the Berlin Wall was not only a symbol of keep ing people inside East Germanyit was a way of preventing a kind of global view of our future.
"That was what the world was like for many people on the planet before the fall of the wall.
If I celebrate the fall of the wall, it is because I am convinced of how much we can learn from each other.
Yes, the world became a better place to live in after 11/9, because each outbreak of freedom stimulated another outbreak, and that process in and of itself had a flattening effect across societies, strengthening those below and weakening those above.
"Women's freedom," noted Sen, cit ing just one example, "which promotes women's literacy, tends to reduce fertility and child mortality and increase the employment opportunities for women, which then affects the political dialogue and gives women the opportunity for a greater role in local self-government."
Finally, the fall of the wall did not just open the way for more people to tap into one another's knowledge pools.
It also paved the way for the THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD adoption of common standardsstandards on how economies should be run, on how accounting should be done, on how banking should be conducted, on how PCs should be made, and on how economics papers should be written.
To put it an other way, the fall of the wall enhanced the free movement of best prac tices.
When an economic or technological standard emerged and proved itself on the world stage, it was much more quickly adopted after the wall was out of the way.
In Europe alone, the fall of the wall opened the way for the formation of the European Union and its expansion from fifteen to twenty-five countries.
Totalitarian systems depend on a monopoly of information and force, and too much information started to slip through the Iron Curtain, thanks to the spread of fax machines, telephones, and, eventually, the personal computer.
Thefirstversion of the Windows operating system launched in 1985, and the breakthrough version that made IBM PCs much more user-friendlyWindows 3.0shipped on May 22, 1990, only six months after the wall went down.
While the fall of the wall eliminated a physical and geopolitical barrierone that held back THE WORLD IS FLAT information, stood in the way of shared standards, and kept us from having a view of the world as a single unified communitythe rise of the Windows-enabled PC, which really popularized personal computing, eliminated another hugely important barrier: the limit on the amount of information that any single individual could amass, author, manipulate, and diffuse.
"The Windows-powered PC enabled millions of individuals, for the first time ever, to become authors of their own content in digital form, which meant that content could be shared far and wide," explained Craig J. Mundie, a chief technical officer for Microsoft.
Over time the AppleIBM-Windows revolution enabled the digital representation of all the important forms of expressionwords, music, numeric data, maps, photographs, and eventually voice and video.
Suddenly ordinary people could get the benefit of computing without being programmers.
The rise of the Windows-enabled PC, combined with the fall of the Wall, set in motion the whole flattening process.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD One of Bill Gates's early mottoes for Microsoft, which he cofounded, was that the company's goal was to give every individual "IAYF"  information at your fingertips.
"People said, 'Wow, there is an asset here, and we should take advan tage of it,'" said Microsoft's Mundie.
And the more established Windows became as the primary operating system, "the more programmers went out and wrote applications for rich-world businesses to put on their com puters, so they could do lots of new and different business tasks, which started to enhance productivity even more.
Tens of millions of people around the world became programmers to make the PC do whatever they wanted in their own languages.
In this same time period, some people other than scientists started to dis cover that if they bought a PC and a dial-up modem, they could connect their PCs to their telephones and send e-mails through private Internet ser vice providerslike CompuServe and America Online.
"The diffusion of personal computers, fax machines, Windows, and dial-up modems con nected to a global telephone network all came together in the late 1980s and early 1990s to create the basic platform that started the global informa tion revolution," argued Mundie.
That happened, said Mundie, once we had in crude form a standardized computing platformthe IBM PCalong with a standardized graphical user interface for word pro cessing and spreadsheetsWindowsalong with a standardized tool for communicationdial-up modems and the global phone network.
Once we had that basic interoperable platform, then the killer applications spreadsheets and word processingdrove its diffusion far and wide.
And once more and more people connected their Windows-enabled PCs with that global communications platform, which spread even THE WORLD IS FLAT more quickly after 1989, when the Berlin Wall came down (and China and India started opening to the global economy), there was nothing to stop the digital representation of everythingwords, music, photos, data, video and then the global exchange of all that digital informa tion.
The political constraint on individual reach collapsed with the fall of the Berlin Wall (though of course large swaths of repression still ex ist), and the practical constraint on individual reach collapsed with the rise of the Apple and Windows-enabled, modem-connected IBM PC.
"There was missing infrastructure."
The Internet as we know it todaywith seemingly magical transmission protocols that can connect everyone and everythinghad not yet emerged.
Back then, networks had only very basic protocols for exchanging files and e-mail messages.
As I said, this level of connectivity surely helped to put the nail in the coffin of communism, because the very tools that were being used to im prove productivity in the West (PCs, faxes, modems), even though much THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD scarcer in the East, vastly improved horizontal person-to-person commu nication there, to the detriment of top-down Communist systems.
It wasn't only Americans and Europeans who joined the people of the Soviet Empire in celebrating the fall of the walland claiming credit for it.
His view was that it was the jihadi fighters in Af ghanistan, of which he was one, who had brought down the Soviet Em pire by forcing the Red Army to withdraw from Afghanistan (with some help from U.S. and Pakistani forces).
And once that mission had been accomplishedthe Soviets completed their pullout from Afghanistan on February 15, 1989, just nine months before the fall of the Berlin W a l l bin Laden looked around and found that the other superpower, the United States, had a huge presence in his own native land, Saudi Arabia, the home of the two holiest cities in Islam.
Both bin Laden and Ronald Reagan saw the Soviet Union as the "evil empire," but bin Laden came to see the United States as evil too.
THE WORLD IS FLAT I, ATT 1 , \ I, R 8/9/95 The New Age of Connectivity: When the Web Went Around and Netscape Went Public B y the mid-1990s, the PC-Windows era had reached a plateau.
The "event" that made that happen was actually a coincidence of events that took place in the space of just a few years in the 1990sthe emergence of the Internet as a tool of low-cost global connectivity; the emergence, on top of the Internet, of the World Wide Web as a seem ingly magical virtual realm where individuals could post their digital content for everyone else to access; and, finally, the spread of the com mercial Web browser, which could retrieve documents or Web pages stored in Web sites and display them on any computer screen in such a simple manner that everyone wouldand didwant to use it.
The concept of a World Wide Weba system for creating, organiz ing, and linking documents so they could be easily browsed over the Internetwas developed by British computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee.
While consulting for CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research in Switzerland, he created the World Wide Web and posted thefirstWeb site in 1991.
But all that the modem and phone line did was connect you to the Internet.
Unless you knew how to manually drive around the Internet to find things, it was not all that exciting.
Yes, there were emerging e-mail systems and networks to communicate with on the THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Internet, but sharing data was really rudimentarybecause there were no Web sites or Web pages or Web browsers to bring to life the data in other people's computers, and worse, no easy way to navigate to them.
The first big breakthrough to bring the Internet alive as a tool of con nectivity and collaborationa tool that anyone, not just computer geeks, could usewas Berners-Lee's World Wide Web.
Although people often use the terms "World Wide Web" and "Internet" interchangeably, they are not the same.
As Berners-Lee himself explains on his own Web site: "The Internet ('Net) is a network of networks.
What Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn [the inventors of the Internet] did was to figure out how this could be used to send around little packets' of information .
That's what the Internet does.
of programs use the Internet: electronic mail, for example, was around long before the global hypertext system I invented and called the World Wide Web."
And what is the World Wide Web?
On the Net, you find computers on the Web, you find documents, sounds, videos.
The Web exists be cause of programs which communicate between computers on the Net.
It explained how the World Wide Web worked, how one could own a browser, how to go about setting up a Web server.
Time magazine (June 14, 1999), in profiling Berners-Lee as one of the one hundred most im portant people of the twentieth century, summed up his creation of the World Wide Web this way: "Thomas Edison got credit for the light bulb, but he had dozens of people in his lab working on it.
And if there ever was a thing that was made by com mittee, the Internetwith its protocols and packet switchingis it.
But the World Wide Web is Berners-Lee's alone.
And he hacked a set of rules that permitted these documents to be linked together on computers across the Internet.
And on the seventh day, BernersLee cobbled together the World Wide Web's first (but not the last) browser, which allowed users anywhere to view his creation on their computer screen.
In 1991 the World Wide Web debuted, instantly bring ing order and clarity to the chaos that was cyberspace.
From that mo ment on, the Web and the Internet grew as one, often at exponential rates.
Within five years, the number of Internet users jumped from 600,000 to 40 million.
A s hugely important as Berners-Lee's invention was, what really pop ularized the Internet and the Web as tools of both connectivity and commerce was the creation of easy-to-install and easy-to-use commercial browsers.
After Berners-Lee, other scientists and academics created a number of browsers to surf this early Web, but the first widely popular commercial browserand the whole culture of Web browsing for the general publicwas created by a tiny start-up company in Mountain View, California, called Netscape.
Netscape went public on August 9, 1995, and the world has not been the same since.
As John Doerr, the legendary venture capitalist whose firm Kleiner Perkins Caulfield & Byers had backed Netscape, put it, "The Netscape IPO was a clarion call to the world to wake up to the Internet.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Netscape was a huge flattening force for several reasons.
To begin with, the Netscape browser not only brought the Internet alive but also made the Internet accessible to everyone from five-year-olds to ninetyfive-year-olds.
The more alive the Internet became, the more different people wanted to do different things on the Web, so the more they de manded computers, software, and telecommunications networks that could easily digitize words, music, data, and photos and transport them on the Internet to anyone else's computer.
This demand was satisfied by another catalytic event: the rollout of Windows 95, which shipped fif teen days after Netscape took its stock public.
Windows 95 would soon become the operating system used by most people worldwide, and un like previous versions of Windows, it was equipped with built-in Internet support, so that not just browsers but all PC applications could "know about the Internet" and interact with it.
Looking back, what enabled Netscape to take off was the existence, from the earlier phase, of millions of PCs, many already equipped with modems.
Those are the shoulders Netscape stood on.
What Netscape did was bring a new killer appthe browserto this installed base of PCs, making the computer and its connectivity inherently more useful for millions of people.
This in turn set off an explosion in demand for all things digital and sparked the Internet boom, because every investor looked at the Internet and concluded that if everything was going to be digitized data, inventories, commerce, books, music, photos, and en tertainmentand transported and sold on the Internet, then the de mand for Internet-based products and services would be infinite.
This led to the dot-com stock bubble and a massive overinvestment in the fiber-optic cable needed to carry all the new digital information.
W hen I sat down with Jim Barksdale, the former Netscape C E O , to interview him for this book, I explained to him that one of the early chapters was about the ten innovations, events, and trends that had THE WORLD IS FLAT flattened the world.
It took Barksdale only a second to ponder that before shooting back with the right answer: "The day Netscape went public!"
He helped Federal Express develop its package tracking and tracing system, then moved over to McCaw Cellular, the mobile phone company, built that up, and oversaw its merger with AT&T in 1994.
In mid-1994, Clark, the founder of Silicon Graphics, had joined forces with Andreessen to found Mosaic, which would quickly be renamed Netscape Communications.
Andreessen, a brilliant young computer sci entist, had just spearheaded a small software project at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA), based at the Univer sity of Illinois, that developed the first really effective, easy-to-use Web browser, also called Mosaic.
As Netscape began to grow, they reached out to Barksdale for guidance and insight into how best to go public.
When Andreessen was back at the University of Illinois NCSA lab, he found that he had PCs, workstations, and the basic network connectivity to move files around the Internet, but it was still not very exciting because there was no simple, evocative user interface to pull up and dis play the contents of other people's Web sites.
So, as Wikipedia recounts, Andreessen and a full-time salaried coworker, Eric Bina, started devel oping a user-friendly browser "with integrated graphics that would work on a wide range of computers.
The resulting code was the Mosaic Web browser.
Marc Andreessen did not invent the Internet or the World Wide Web, but he certainly played a historic role in helping to bring them alive and make them easily usable tools.
So we built [the first browsers as] software tools to enable researchers to 'browse' each other's re search.
"Every summer, Fortune magazine had an article about the twenty-five coolest companies around," Barksdale re called.
Since the late 1980s, people had been putting up databases with Internet access.
Barksdale said that after speaking to Doerr and Clark, he went home, gathered his three children around his computer, and asked them each to suggest a topic he could browse the Internet forand wowed them by coming up with some thing for each of them.
THE WORLD IS FLAT Netscape's first commercial browserwhich could work on an IBM PC, an Apple Macintosh, or a Unix computerwas released in Decem ber 1994, and within a year it completely dominated the market.
You could download Netscape for free if you were in education or a non profit.
"We put up the Netscape browser," said Barksdale, "and people were downloading it for three-month trials.
IV Tothing did stop it, and that is why Netscape played another hugely 1 i important flattening role: It helped make the Internet truly inter operable.
You will recall that in the Berlin Wall-PC-Windows phase, individuals who had e-mail and companies that had internal e-mail could not connect very far.
The first Cisco Internet router, in fact, was built by a husband and wife at Stanford who wanted to exchange e-mail; one was working off a mainframe and the other on a PC, and they couldn't connect.
And as the Internet emerged as a public, commercial venture, there was a real danger that it would emerge in the same discon nected way."
Joe in the accounting department would get on his office PC and try THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD to get the latest sales numbers for 1995, but he couldn't do that because the sales department was on a different system from the one accounting was using.
Then Joe would go home and find his seventh grader on the World Wide Web researching a term pa per, using open protocols, and looking at the holdings of some art mu seum in France.
In the years before the Internet became commercialized, BernersLee, Vint Cerf, Bob Kahn, and other scientists had developed a series of "open protocols" meant to make everyone's e-mail system or university computer network connect seamlessly with everyone else'sto ensure that no one had some special advantage.
Together, they form a system for transporting data around the Internet and the World Wide Web in a relatively secure man ner, no matter what network your company or household has or what computer or cell phone or handheld device you are using.
Each proto col had a different function: TCP/IP was the basic plumbing of the Internet, or the basic railroad tracks, on which everything else above it was built and moved around.
SMTP and POP moved e-mail messages, which became standardized, so that they could be writ ten and read on different e-mail systems.
HTML, as noted above, al lowed ordinary people to author Web pages, and HTTP enabled people to connect to HTML documents on the World Wide Web.
As browsing and the Internet in general grew, Netscape wanted to THE WORLD IS FLAT make sure that Microsoft, with its huge market dominance, would not be able to shift these Web protocols from open to proprietary standards that only Microsoft's servers would be able to handle.
"Netscape helped to guarantee that these open protocols would not be proprietary by com mercializing them for the public," said Andreessen.
"Netscape came along not only with the browser but with a family of software products that implemented all these open standards so that the scientists could communicate with each other no matter what system they were ona Cray supercomputer, a Macintosh, or a PC.
Netscape was able to pro vide a real reason for everyone to say, 'I want to be on open standards for everything I do and for all the systems I work on.'
Once we created a way to browse the Internet, people wanted a universal way to access what was out there.
So anyone who wanted to work on open standards went to Netscape, where we supported them, or they went to the open-source world and got the same standards for free but unsupported, or they went to their private vendors and said, 'I am not going to buy your proprietary stuff anymore .
I am only going to stay with you if you interconnect to the Internet with these open protocols.'
" Netscape began pushing these open standards through the sale of its browsers, and the public responded enthusiastically.
Sun started to do the same with its servers, and Microsoft started to do the same with Windows 95, considering browsing so critical that it famously built its own browser directly into Windows with the addition of Internet Ex plorer.
Each realized that the public, which suddenly could not get enough of e-mail and browsing, wanted the Internet companies to work together and create one interoperable network.
They wanted companies to compete with each other over different applications, that is, over what consumers could do once they were on the Internetnot over how they got on the Internet in the first place.
As a result, after quite a few "format wars" among the big companies, by the late 1990s the Internet comput ing platform became seamlessly integrated.
[But] people did it very quickly, and ten years later there were eight hundred million people on the Internet."
That is what Netscape unlocked."
As Joel Cawley, IBM's vice president of corporate strategy, put it, "Netscape created a standard around how data would be transported and rendered on the screen that was so simple and com pelling that anyone and everyone could innovate on top of it.
In the summer of 1995, Barksdale and his Netscape colleagues went on an old-fashioned road show with their investment bankers from Morgan Stanley to try to entice investors around the country to buy Netscape stock once it went public.
"When we went out on the road," said Barksdale, "Morgan Stanley said the stock could sell for as high as $14.
But after the road show got going, they were getting such demand for the stock, they decided to double the opening price to $28.
The last afternoon before the offering, we were all in Maryland.
We needed to be in touch with Morgan Stanley [head quarters], but we were somewhere where our cell phones didn't work.
We called up Morgan Stanley, and they said, 'We're thinking of bringing it out at $31/1 said, 'No, let's keep it at $28,' because I wanted people to remember it as a $20 stock, not a $30 stock, just in case it didn't go so well.
Netscape eventually fell victim to overwhelming (and, the courts de cided, monopolistic) competitive pressure from Microsoft.
Microsoft's decision to give away its browser, Internet Explorer, as part of its domi nant Windows operating system, combined with its ability to invest more and better resources into Web browsing than Netscape, combined with a certain loss of focus at Netscape as it expanded so fast, led Netscape to steadily lose market share.
In the end, Netscape was sold for $10 billion to AOL, which never did much with it.
But though Netscape may have been only a shooting star in commercial terms, what a star it was, and what a trail it left.
"Netscape was not a dot-com.
"Netscape going public stimulated a lot of things," said Barksdale.
What was it that stimulated investors to believe that demand for Internet usage and Internet-related products would be infinite?
Once the PC-Windows revolution demon strated to everyone the value of being able to digitize information and manipulate it on computers and word processors, and once the browser brought the Internet alive and made Web pages sing and dance and dis play, everyone wanted everything digitized as much as possible so they could send it to someone else down the Internet pipes.
It used to be the post office was where I went to send my mail, but once the Internet came alive, I wanted my mail digi tized so I could e-mail it.
But once the Internet made it possible to send pictures around the world, attached to or in e-mails, I didn't want to use silver film anymore.
I used to have to go to Barnes & Noble to buy and browse for books, but once the Internet came alive, I wanted to browse for books digitally on Amazon.com as well.
I used to go to the library to do research, but now I wanted to do it digitally through Google or Yahoo!, not just by roaming the stacks.
I used to buy a C D to listen to Simon & GarfunkelCDs had already replaced albums as a form of digitized musicbut once the Internet came alive, I wanted those music bits to be even more malleable and mobile.
If everyone wants all this stuff digitized and turned into bits and transmitted over the Internet, the demand for Web service companies and the demand for fiber-optic cables to handle all this digitized stuff around the world is going to be limitless!
I'll always remember a news conference that Microsoft chairman Bill Gates held at the 1999 World Economic Forum in Davos, at the height of the tech bubble.
Over and over again, Gates was bombarded by reporters with versions of the question, "Mr. Gates, THE WORLD IS FLAT these Internet stocks, they're a bubble, right?
This bubble is attracting so much new capital to this Internet industry, it is going to drive innovation faster and faster."
Gates compared the Internet to the gold rush, the idea being that more money was made selling Levi's, picks, shovels, and hotel rooms to the gold diggers than from digging up gold from the earth.
Gates was right: Booms and bubbles may be economically dangerous; they may end up with many people losing money and a lot of companies going bankrupt.
But they also often do drive innovation faster and faster, and the sheer overcapacity that they spurwhether it is in railroad lines or automobiles can create its own unintended positive consequences.
That is what happened with the Internet stock boom.
It sparked a huge overinvestment in fiber-optic cable companies, which then laid massive amounts of fiber-optic cable on land and under the oceans, which dramatically drove down the cost of making a phone call or trans mitting data anywhere in the world.
The first commercial installation of a fiber-optic system was in 1977, after which fiber slowly began to replace copper telephone wires, be cause it could carry data and digitized voices much farther and faster in larger quantities.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD The way fiber-optic cables work, explains one of the manufacturers, ARC Electronics, on its Web site, is by converting data or voices into light pulses and then transmitting them down fiber lines, instead of using electronic pulses to transmit information down copper lines.
A light-emitting diode (LED) or an injection-laser diode (ILD) can be used to generate the light pulses, which are then funneled down the fiber-optic cable.
The cable functions as a kind of light guide, guiding the light pulses introduced at one end of the cable through to the other end, where a light-sensitive receiver con verts the pulses back into the electronic digital Is and Os of the original signal, so they can then show up on your computer screen as e-mail or in your cell phone as a voice.
It was actually the coincidence of the dot-com boom and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 that launched the fiber-optic bubble.
The act allowed local and long-distance companies to get into each other's businesses, and enabled all sorts of new local exchange carriers to compete head-to-head with the Baby Bells and AT&T in providing both phone services and infrastructure.
As these new phone companies came online, offering their own local, long-distance, international, data, and Internet services, each sought to have its own infrastructure.
The Internet boom led everyone to assume that the demand for band width to carry all that Internet traffic would double every three months indefinitely.
Unfor tunately, the telecom companies weren't paying close attention to the de veloping mismatch between demand and reality.
The market was in the grip of an Internet fever, and companies just kept building more and more capacity.
So every one of these incredibly optimistic scenarios from every one of these new telecom companies got funded.
In a period of about five THE WORLD IS FLAT or six years, these telecom companies invested about $1 trillion in wiring the world.
Few companies got crazier than Global Crossing, one of the compa nies hired by all these new tlcoms to lay fiber-optic cable for them around the world.
Global Crossing was founded in 1997 by Gary Winnick and went public the next year.
Robert Annunziata, who lasted only a year as C E O , had a contract that the Corporate Library's Nell Minow once picked as the worst (from the point of view of shareholders) in the United States.
Henry Schacht, a veteran industrialist now with Warburg Pincus, was brought in by Lucent, the successor of Western Electric, to help manage it through this crazy period.
He recalled the atmosphere: "The telecom deregulation of 1996 was hugely important.
It allowed competitive local ex change carriers to build their own capacities and sell in competition with each other and with the Baby Bells.
These new tlcoms went to companies like Global Crossing and had them install fiber networks for them so they could compete at the transport level with AT&T and MCI, particularly on overseas traffic .
It turned out that while business-to-business and e-commerce devel oped as projected, and a lot of Web sites that no one anticipated ex plodedlike eBay, Amazon, and Googlethey still devoured only a fraction of the capacity that was being made available.
So when the dot com bust came along, there was just way too much fiber-optic cable out there.
"The telecom industry has in vested itself right out of business," Mike McCue, chief operations offi- THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD cer of Tellme Networks, a voice-activated Internet service, told C N E T News.com in June 2001.
It was a disaster for many of the companies and their investors (Glo bal Crossing filed for bankruptcy in January 2002, with $12.4 billion in debt), but it turned out to be a great boon for consumers.
Just as the na tional highway system that was built in the 1950s flattened the United States, broke down regional differences, and made it so much easier for companies to relocate in lower-wage regions, like the South, because it had become so much easier to move people and goods long distances, so the laying of global fiber highways flattened the developed world.
While a huge amount of long-distance fiber cable was laid to connect India and America, virtually none of these new U.S. telecom companies laid any substantial new local loop infrastructure, due to a failure of the 1996 tele com deregulation act to permit real competition in the local loop be tween the cable companies and the telephone companies.
Where the local broadband did get installed was in office buildings, which were al ready pretty well served by the old companies.
So this pushed prices down for businessesand for Indians who wanted to get online from Bangalore to do business with those businessesbut it didn't create the sort of com petition that could bring cheap broadband capability to the American masses in their homes.
Unlike other forms of Internet overinvestment, it was permanent: Once the fiber cables were laid, no one was going to dig them up and thereby eliminate the overca pacity.
So when the telecom companies went bankrupt, the banks took them over and then sold their fiber cables for ten cents on the dollar to new companies, which continued to operate them, which they could do THE WORLD IS FLAT profitably, having bought them in a fire sale.
"Every layer of innovation gets built on the next," said Andreessen, who went on from Netscape to start another high-tech firm, Opsware Inc. "And today the most profound thing to me is the fact that a fourteenyear-old in Romania or Bangalore or the Soviet Union or Vietnam has all the information, all the tools, all the software easily available to apply knowledge however they want.
That is why I am sure the next Napster is going to come out of left field.
As bioscience becomes more computa tional and less about wet labs, and as all the genomic data becomes eas ily available on the Internet, at some point you will be able to design vaccines on your laptop."
Now we are going to see the real human mosaic emergefrom all over the world, from left field and right field, from West and East and North and South to drive the next generation of innovation.
Indeed, a few days after Andreessen and I talked, the following headline appeared on the front page of The New York Times (July 15, 2004): "U.S.
Then came along this Internet-e-mail-browser phase, and it flattened the earth a little bit more.
It was about me and my computer interacting with anyone any where on any machine, which is what e-mail is all about, and me and my computer interacting with anybody's Web site on the Internet, which is what browsing is all about.
In short, the Apple-PC-Windows phase begat the Netscape browsing-e-mail phase, and the two together enabled more people to communicate and interact with more other people any where on the planet than ever before.
I I, ATT I\ \ I, R // ^ WORK I FLOW SOFTWARE met Scott Hyten, the C E O of Wild Brain, a cutting-edge animation studio in San Francisco that produces films and cartoons for Disney and other major studios, at a meeting in Silicon Valley in the winter of 2004.1 had been invited by John Doerr, the venture capitalist, to test out the ideas in this book with a few of the companies that he was backing.
Hyten and I really hit it off, maybe because after hearing my arguments he wrote me an e-mail that said, "I am sure in Magellan's time there were THE WORLD IS FLAT plenty of theologians, geographers, and pundits who wanted to make the world flat again.
A man after my own heart.
"At Wild Brain," he said, "we make something out of nothing.
"The recording session," explained Hyten, "is located near the artist, usually in New York or L.A., the design and direction is done in San Francisco, the writers network in from their homes (Florida, London, New York, Chicago, L A , and San Francisco), and the animation of the char acters is done in Bangalore with edits from San Francisco.
These interactive recording/writing/animation ses sions allow us to record an artist for an entire show in less than half a day, including unlimited takes and rewrites.
Technically, we do this over the Internet.
We have a VPN [virtual private network] configured on computers in our offices and on what we call writ ers' 'footballs,' or special laptop computers that can connect over any catfive Ethernet connection or wireless broadband connection in the 'field.'
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD This VPN allows us to share the feed from the microphone, images from the session, the real-time script, and all the animation designs amongst all the locations with a simple log-in.
Therefore, one way for you to observe is for us to ship you a football.
You connect at home, the office, most hotel rooms, or go down to your local Starbucks [which has wireless broadband Internet access], log on, put on a pair of Bose noise-reduction headphones, and listen, watch, read, and comment.
Technically, you need the 'football' only for the session.
Hyten has since left Wild Brain, but I am glad I visited him that day, because the company is a graphic example of the next layer of innovation, and the next flattener, that broadly followed on the Berlin Wall-Windows and Netscape phases.
The fall of the Berlin Wall was a loud historic event that nobody missed.
Netscape's going public was also much ballyhooed.
But the rise and integration of work flow software was a quiet rev olution that most people had no clue was happening.
As a result, work started to flow within and be tween companies and continents faster than ever.
To get to this point took a lot of new software innovation piled on the shoulders of earlier innovations.
Here's how the work flow revolution de veloped: When the walls went down, and then the PC and Netscape browser enabled people to connect with other people as never before, it did not take long before all these people who were connecting wanted to do more than just browse and send e-mail, instant messages, pictures, and music over this Internet platform.
They wanted to shape things, design things, create things, sell things, buy things, keep track of inventories, do somebody else's taxes, and read somebody else's X-rays from half a world away.
THE WORLD IS FLAT The first big breakthrough in work flow was actually the combination of the PC and e-mail.
Remember, before the diffusion of computers and the Internet, work flow consisted of your sales department taking an or der on paper over the phone, walking it over to your shipping depart ment, which shipped the product, and then someone from shipping walking over to billing with a piece of paper and instructing the billing department to churn out an invoice to the customer.
But as a result of the Wall-PC-Netscape innovations, work flow took a huge leap forward.
Your sales department could take an order over the phone or by mail, en ter it into a computer system, e-mail the order to the shipping depart ment within your own company, and then have the shipping department send out the product to the customer and automatically spit out a com puterized bill at the same time.
And, if your whole office was using the same hardware, software, and e-mail system, you could be even more productive, by seamlessly shooting your digitized content around your company, from department to department.
But more often than not, back in the 1980s and early 1990s, companies did not run all the same software and hardware.
Companies installed systems piecemeal or found that one computer-software system was good for the accounting depart ment and another system was best for inventory management and a third was best for e-mail.
Therefore, a company's sales department might be running Microsoft, while the inventory department was running Novell or IBM.
So while each individual department was more productive inside its own walls, because it had computers, soft ware, and e-mail, when there was an issue between departments that needed to be resolved, someone from sales still had to walk around the wall, over to inventory, and speak to someone there.
So while it was a big breakthrough that we standardized the ways that words, music, pictures, and data would be digitized on PCs and trans ported on the Internet, for work really to be able to flow seamlessly around my company, and then to other companies in my digital ecosys tem, we needed two more things.
We needed more magic pipes, more transmission protocols and languages, that would ensure that everyone's e-mail and software applications could connect seamlessly with everyone else's e-mail and software applications inside and outside my companyno matter what computer or software they were running.
And we needed programmers to come along and write new applicationsnew software that would enable us really to get the maximum from our computers as we worked with this digitized data, words, music, and pictures and shaped them into products.
The software industry did the first by creating and popularizing a pro tocol known as SMTPsimple mail transfer protocolwhich enabled the exchange of e-mail messages between heterogeneous computer sys tems.
So you could send e-mail to other people without having to worry about what hardware or e-mail service they had.
But for your company to get really flat, e-mail was not enough.
That is, your sales depart ment had to be able to send not just e-mail messages but also documents to your billing department and spreadsheets to your supplier's inventory department.
And your supplier's inventory department had to be seam lessly connected to its supplier's supplier, which was a factory in China.
This railroad turned out to be the protocols I mentioned abovethe language of the Internet and World Wide Web.
HTTP was the computer language that described how you put this content on the Internet railroad how you made it into a railroad car that could go anywhere.
And TCP/IP (transmission control protocol/ Internet protocol) was the railroad trackthe transport system that took the data from your Web pages around the Internet from computer to computer and Web site to Web site.
"These protocols allowed people to exchange things other than stan dardized Word documents or e-mail," explained Craig Mundie, the Microsoft chief technical officer.
Wild Brain wanted seamlessly interoperable work flow software to make animated films with a production team spread out around the world.
Boeing wanted it so that its airplane factories in America could constantly resupply different airline customers with parts, through its computer ordering systems, no matter what country those orders came from, and so its designers could work on planes using airplane engineers from Russia to India to Japan.
Doctors wanted it so that an X-ray taken in Bangor could be read in a hospital in Bangalore, without THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD the doctor in Maine ever having to wonder what computers that Indian hospital had.
And Mom and Dad wanted it so that their e-banking soft ware, e-brokerage software, office e-mail, and spreadsheet software all would work off their home laptop and be able to interface with their of fice desktop or BlackBerry handheld device.
"But then," added Microsoft's Mundie, "we said to ourselves, 'Geez, if we really want to automate everything, then we need to make it much easier not just for people to talk to people, but for machines to talk to machinesfor machines to interact with other machines about any sub ject without any humans involved at all or any a priori relationship be tween the different companies whose machines were communicating.'
Together, they allow any two computer programs to exchange formatted data or documents that contain any form of information  whether billing records, financial transactions, medical records, music, pictures, bank records, Web pages, advertisements, book excerpts, Word documents, or stock sales.
Microsoft, IBM, and a host of other compa nies contributed to the development of XML and SOAP, and both were subsequently ratified and popularized as Internet standards.
Suddenly I could write my own invoice program, using XML and SOAP, and know that my computers could transmit that invoice to your computers, without any human beings in volved or any a priori agreement between our two companies.
In sum, we started in the 1980s with people being able to use PCs to author their own content in digital form, which they printed out on pa per and then exchanged with others by hand or surface mail and even tually e-mail.
Then we went to people being able to churn out digital THE WORLD IS FLAT content on their PCs, which they transmitted around the Internet, thanks to standardized protocols, collaborating with anyone anywhere.
And finally, today, we have reached a point in work flow that machines are talking to other machines over the Internet using standardized pro tocols, with no humans involved at all.
The great thing about HTML, HTTP, TCP/IP, XML, and SOAP is that once they were adopted as standardsand everything and everyone became increasingly interoperable and interconnectedsoftware companies stopped competing over who got to control the fire hydrant nozzles and focused on who could make bet ter hoses and fire trucks to pump more water.
In other words, once everyone could con nect with everyone else, they got busy on the real value add, which was coming up with the most useful and nifty software applications to en hance collaboration, innovation, and creativity.
"For example," said IBM's Joel Cawley, "when you apply for a mort gage, go to your closing, or buy a house, there are literally dozens of processes and data flows among many different companies.
One bank may handle securing your approval, checking your credit, establishing your interest rates, and handling the closingafter which the loan al most immediately is sold to a different bank."
We are already seeing standards emerging around how payrolls are done, e-commerce payment, and risk profiling, around how music and photos are digitally transmitted and editedthe JPEG standard, for instanceand, most important, around how supply chains are connected.
For instance, it is great that anyone can get on eBay and become a buyer or seller from any machine using any browser, but what really made the eBay marketplace explode was when it adopted PayPal, a stan dard that enabled the buyer to pay the seller very easily.
PayPal is a money transfer system founded in 1998 to facilitate C2C (customer-tocustomer) transactions, like a buyer and seller brought together by eBay.
According to ecommerce-guide.com, using PayPal, anyone with an e-mail address can send money to anyone else with an e-mail address, whether the recipient has a PayPal account or not.
PayPal doesn't even care whether a commercial transaction is taking place.
If someone in the of fice is organizing a party for someone else and everyone needs to chip in, they can all do it using PayPal.
In fact, the organizer can send everyone PayPal reminders by e-mail with clear instructions as to how to pay up.
PayPal can accept money from the purchaser in one of three ways, notes ecommerce-guide.com: charging the purchaser's credit card for any transactions (payments), debiting a checking account for any payments, or deducting payments from a PayPal account established with a per sonal check.
Payment recipients can use the money in their account for online purchases or payments, can receive the payment from PayPal by check, or can have PayPal directly deposit the money into a checking ac count.
Setting up a PayPal account is simple.
As a payer, all you have to do is to provide your name, your e-mail address, your credit card infor mation, and your billing address for your credit card.
All of these interoperable banking and e-commerce functions flat tened the Internet marketplace so radically that even eBay was taken by surprise.
Before PayPal, explained eBay C E O Meg Whitman, "If I did business on eBay in 1999, the only way I could pay you as a buyer was with a check or money order, a paper-based system.
What PayPal did was enable people, individu als, to accept credit cards.
In fact, it was so good that eBay bought PayPal, but not on the recommendation of its Wall Street investment bankers on the recommendation of its users.
"We woke up one day," said Whitman, "and found out that 20 per cent of the people on eBay were saying, 'I accept PayPal, please pay me that way/ And we said, 'Who are these people and what are they doing?'
At first we tried to fight them and launched our own service, called Billpoint.
We want a standardand by the way, we have picked the standard and it's called PayPal, and we know you guys at eBay would like it to be your [standard], but it's theirs.'
The week before your appointment, your dentist's calendar will automatically send you an e-mail reminding you of the appointment.
The more we con nect everyone through common communication standards, like XML, and then, on top of those protocols, connect more and more people through standardized business processes, said Cawley, the easier it is to THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD chop up work and send pieces of it to be done anywhere in the world, and the more it increases productivity and enables my whole digital ecosystem to collaborate better, cheaper, and faster, and the more energy my employees have to concentrate on the high-touch, high-value-add, customized innovation or service that differentiates one company from another.
Standards don't stop innovation, added Cawley, they just clear away a lot of extraneous stuff so you can focus on what really matters.
Now that we have created more and more standard ways for people and machines to de scribe and share documents and work together, and at least some stan dards for how to conduct certain kinds of commercelike mortgages or credit card paymentsanother revolution is under way, made possible by an emerging new way of coding called AJAX (short for asynchronous JavaScript and XML).
In the Business Web, as it is being called, you access these tools on the Web, use them on the Web, and store all your business data on the Web, rather than on your own computers.
Before long these Web-delivered services will likely replace some, or all, of the business software programs that you buy, load, update, upgrade, and integrate with other systems.
Ray Ozzie, another of Microsoft's chief technical officers, calls it "the Internet services disrup tion."
Here is how it works: Internet-based services companies are emerg ing today all across the Web.
For a fee, these companies-Salesforce.com, for examplegive you access to a library of Web-based business applica tions, which you can just tap into online to run your business.
These ap plications operate like traditional software programs and can handle a THE WORLD IS FLAT wide range of business tasks.
Because these tools are delivered over the Internet and written in standard Web formats, they are accessible to anyone who has an Internet connection and are easily interoperable with any business.
What enables work flow at this level is AJAX, a Web development technique that allows complex Internet business applications to be embedded onto a Web page, then called up with a simple browser and accessed as easily as viewing a page on Amazon.com.
AJAX, in effect, allows you to do over the Internet all the word, data, and business processing you would normally do on a PC with conventional software.
You as a business pay Salesforce.com $65 per individual user per month to subscribe to its Web-based platform ($17 per user for companies of one to five people).
"We are not just try ing to move information and data; we are trying to share business solu tions and best practices for how things get donewithin companies and across companies."
You can then turn around and offer that solution back to the Salesforce.com platform as a tool others might want to usefor free, or you can get a fee for your business process innovation.
Juster said one of his favorite customers using Salesforce.corn's platform is a thirty-something small businessman in Shanghai, Justin Lu, and his company, Protime Consulting.
Lu helps global companies which have outlets in China, like Sony, Hyatt, or Este Lauder, with their e-marketing and Web site solutions.
"We've been able to grow very quickly by focusing on what's important to generating more revenue and keeping our systems costs low with Web-delivered services."
For instance, he uses Salesforce.com's online e-mail marketing system to send out mass e-mails, he uses its sales force automation system to han dle all presale data, and he uses its customer relationship management system to build a corporate memory around all his customer interactions.
I learned of a start-up that is using the Business Web to sell organic vi tamins.
This guy pays Yahoo!
a fee every month so that any time anyone searches for the words "organic vitamins" on Yahoo!, one of his ads pops up.
With virtually no money, working out of his homebut leveraging the search power of Yahoo!
Just as the Business Web is giving small businessmen like Justin Lu easy access to some business tools that only large companies could afford a few years ago, it is also setting the stage for a revolutionary change in the balance of power among the providers of business applications.
The next logical step in the evolution of the Business Web will be eBay-like marketplaces for business services.
Individual developers and entrepre neurs, whether they are located in Shanghai, Bangalore, or Silicon Valley, will be able to write applications, plug their innovations into Web THE WORLD IS FLAT platforms like Salesforce.com, and leverage the marketing and distribu tion strength of these Web platforms to sell globally, without the heavy investment that is required today to commercialize software.
"This is just the beginning of the Business Web," argued Benioff, Salesforce.corn's C E O , in a memo to his staff in November 2005.
New Internet-based companies are showing how ser vices will replace software for both consumers and corporations."
As Benioff likes to put it: "Microsoft wants you to buy more software.
Microsoft has taken notice.
The New York Times reported on No vember 9, 2005, that Ray Ozzie had written an in-house memo warning senior executives that Microsoft had to fundamentally alter its business "or face being at a significant competitive disadvantage to a growing ar ray of companies offering Internet services."
A few days later, Microsoft announced that it would offer two new servicesWindows Live and Office Live, which essentially are Business Web versions of two of its more popular products.
A few weeks later, Google announced that it was offering a free, downloadable software bundle, with none of the pro grams coming from Microsoft.
There is no question that the Business Web will challenge Microsoft.
But I wouldn't short Microsoft or throw out all my software just yet.
It is true we are going from a world where companies were independent sys tems, to a world where they became interconnected and interdependent systems, to a world where now companies large and small can assemble an interoperable system of systems on their own just by going to the Business Web and renting or assembling whatever discrete programs they would like.
Because it is going to give small and medium-size businesses access to some of the powerful work flow tools that a few years ago only big companies could afford.
That is why there will still be a place for the big, smart traditional soft ware companies, like Microsoft and SAP, that can create a tailored so lution for each client.
Also, as Microsoft has demonstrated, it too will make some of its programs available on the Business Web.
Nevertheless, this revolution in work flow that we have witnessed  from transmission protocols to standards to business processes that you can now just rent off the Web is surely going to lead to an explosion of experimentation and innovation.
"Work flow platforms are enabling us to do for the service industry what Henry Ford did for manufacturing," said Jerry Rao, the entrepre neur doing accounting work for Americans out of India.
These work flow software platforms, Rao added, "enable you to create virtual global officesnot limited by either the boundaries of your office or your countryand to access talent sitting in different parts of the world and have them complete tasks that you need completed in real time.
Then the spread of the Internet and the com ing to life of the Web, thanks to the browser and fiber optics, enabled more people than ever to be connected and to share their digital content with more other people for less money than any time before.
All the elements of this new platform (such as the Business Web) would take more time to fully emerge and converge.
There was suddenly available a platform for collaboration that all kinds of people from around the globe could now plug and play, compete and connect THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD onin order to share work, exchange knowledge, start companies, and in vent and sell goods and services.
"It is the creation of this platform, with these unique attributes, that is the truly important sustainable break through that made what you call the flattening of the world possible," said Microsoft's Craig Mundie.
I call them "uploading," "out sourcing," "offshoring," "supply-chaining," "insourcing," and "in-forming."
I l.A 1 T I.N I, R //4 UPLOADING Harnessing the Power of Communities A lan Cohen still remembers the first time he heard the word "Apache" as an adult, and it wasn't while watching a cowboys-andIndians movie.
It was the 1990s, the dot-com market was booming, and he was a senior manager for IBM, helping to oversee its emerging e-commerce business.
"We were competing head-to-head with Microsoft, THE WORLD IS FLAT Netscape, Oracle, Sun all the big boys.
And we were playing this very big-stakes game for e-commerce.
IBM had a huge sales force selling all this e-commerce software.
One day I asked the development director who worked for me, 'Say, Jeff, walk me through the development process for these e-commerce systems.
And he says to me, 'It's built on top of Apache.'
'What is Apache?'
And that was my first exposure to Apache .
"Now you have to remember, back then Microsoft, IBM, Oracle, Netscape were all trying to build commercial Web servers.
These were huge companies.
And suddenly my development guy is telling me that he's getting ours off the Internet for free!
I kept asking, 'Who runs Apache?
It's called blogging.
And a community of geeks in the library is now writing its own encyclopedia entries, uploading them to the world, and cutting out the traditional book-form encyclopedias and even digital ones like Encarta.
It's called Wikipedia.
And the geeks in the dorm are increasingly offering up their own songs, and videos, and poetry, and rap, and commentary, to you and me and the rest of the world, cutting out the music stores and the traditional content providers.
It's called podcasting.
And the terrorist geeks in al-Qaeda are increasingly uploading their own news reports, threats, and speeches, not waiting for the BBC or CBS to come talk to them, and then they're zapping their terror mes sages directly into your computer, via AOL or MSN.
These are all variations of uploading.
This newfound power of individuals and communities to send up, out, and around their own products and ideas, often for free, rather than just passively downloading them from commercial enterprises or tradi tional hierarchies, is fundamentally reshaping the flow of creativity, innovation, political mobilization, and information gathering and dis semination.
This is now true inside traditional companies and institutions as well as outside them.
Uploading is, without doubt, becoming one of the most revolu tionary forms of collaboration in the flat world.
I got the idea of defining "uploading" (in this context) as my fourth flattener from a brilliant essay, "We Are the Web," by Wired magazine's cofounder and "senior maverick," Kevin Kelly (August 2005).
Kelly noted that when the Internet first emerged on a mass scale in the post-Netscape era, "the bandwidth on cable and phone lines was asymmetrical: down load rates far exceeded upload rates.
Fast-forward to today, and the poster child of the new Internet regime is BitTorrent.
[BitTorrent is a Web site that allows users to upload their own THE WORLD IS FLAT online music libraries and download other people s at the same time.]
Our communication infrastructure has taken only the first steps in this great shift from audience to participants, but that is where it will go in the next decade."
It is not impossible to imagine, added Kelly, that one day in the future, "everyone alive will (on average) write a song, author a book, make a video, craft a Weblog, and code a program .
What happens when everyone is uploading far more than they download?"
I am going to focus here on three forms of uploading: the communitydeveloped software movement, Wikipedia, and blogging/podcasting.
COMMUNITY-DEVELOPED SOFTWARE The community-developed software movement, also known as the "opensource" community, derives its identity from the notion that companies or ad hoc communities should make available online the source codethe underlying programming instructions that make a piece of software workand then let anyone who has something to contribute improve it and let millions of others just download it for their own use.
One faction, let s call it the "intellectual commons community," basically says THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD that anyone in the community may use the source code as the foundation for a commercial productas long as you always acknowledge the origi nal group that produced it.
The other group, let's call it the "free software community," argues that if you build and distribute any derivative product on the shoulders of community-developed free software code, you need to contribute your innovation back to the com munity as well.
The first community-developed software movement really to make a mark took the intellectual commons approach.
It came out of the aca demic and scientific communities, where for a long time self-organized col laborative communities of scientists have come together through private networks (and, eventually, the Internet) to pool their brainpower or share insights around a particular science or math problem.
The Apache Web server had its roots in this form of open-sourcing.
Marc Andreessen, who invented the Mosaic Web browser, agreed: "Open-source is nothing more than peer-reviewed science.
Some people also clearly get a buzz from trying to challenge giants, like Microsoft or IBM, by proving that they can build something better for free.
To learn more about this intellectual commons form of software development, I went exploring among the geeky guys and girls in the mailroom.
If Apachethe open-source Web server communitywere an Indian tribe, Behlendorf would be the tribal elder.
I caught up with him one day in his glass-and-steel office near the San Francisco airport, where he is now founder and chief technology officer of CollabNet, a start up focused on creating software for companies that want to use an opensource approach to innovation.
"My parents met at IBM in Southern California, and I grew up in a town just north of Pasadena, La Canada," Behlendorf recalled.
"The public school was very competitive academically, because a lot of the kids' parents worked at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory that was run by Caltech there.
In grade school, I started doing some basic programming, and by high school I was pretty into comput ers .
I graduated in 1991, but in 1989, in the early days of the Internet, a friend gave me a copy of a program he had downloaded onto a floppy disk, called Tractint.'
It was not pirated, but was freeware, produced by a group of programmers, and was a program for drawing fractals.
When the program started up, the screen would show this scrolling list of e-mail addresses for all the scientists and mathematicians who con tributed to it.
Here was this program that you just downloaded for free, and they even gave you the source code with it, and it was done by a community of people.
It started to paint a different picture of programming in my mind.
I started to think that there were some interesting social dynamics to the way certain kinds of software were written or could be writtenas op posed to the kind of image I had of the professional software developer in the back office tending to the mainframe, feeding info in and taking it out for the business.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD After graduating in 1991, Behlendorf went to Berkeley to study physics, but he quickly became frustrated by the disconnect between the abstractions he was learning in the classroom and the excitement that was starting to emerge on the Internet.
"When you entered college back then, every student was given an e-mail address, and I started using it to talk to students and explore dis cussion boards that were starting to appear around music," said Behlen dorf.
"In 1992,1 started my own Internet mailing list focused on the local electronic music scene in the Bay Area.
By 1993, the Internet was still just mailing lists and e-mail and FTP sites [file transfer protocol repositories where you could store things].
That led me to a discussion board with a lot of the people who were writ ing the first generation of Web browsers and Web servers."
(A Web server is a software program that enables anyone to use his or her home or office computer to host a Web site on the World Wide Web.
Amazon.com, for instance, has long run its Web site on Apache software.
When your Web browser goes to www.amazon.com, the very first piece of software it talks to is Apache.
The browser asks Apache for the Amazon Web page and Apache sends back to the browser the content of the Amazon Web page.
He was one of the first employees at Wired magazine, and he said Wired would be in terested in having me set up a Web site for them.
So I joined there at $10 an hour, setting up their e-mail and their first Web siteHotWired .
HotWired decided it wanted to start by having a registration system that required passwordsa controversial concept at that time.
"In those days," noted Andrew Leonard, who wrote a history of Apache for Salon.com in 1997, "most Webmasters depended on a Web server program developed at the University of Illinois's National Center for Supercomputing Applications (also the birthplace of the groundbreaking Mosaic Web browser).
But the NCSA Web server couldn't handle password authenti cation on the scale that HotWired needed.
Leonard commented, "He wasn't the only clever programmer rummaging through the NCSA code that winter.
The original code had been left to gather virtual dust when its primary programmer, University of Illinois student Rob McCool, had been scooped up (along with Marc Andreessen and Lynx author Eric Bina) by a little-known company in Silicon Valley named Netscape.
So a discussion started in our little working group that the NCSA people were not answering our e-mails.
Most of them were on the standards working groups [the Internet Engineering Task Force] that were setting the first standards for the interconnectivity be tween machines and applications on the Internet... And we said, 'Why don't we take our future into our own hands and release our own [Web server] version that incorporated all our patches?'
This was all before Netscape had shipped its first commercial Web server.
That was the beginning of the Apache project."
By February 1999, they had completely rewritten the original NCSA program and formalized their cooperation under the name "Apache."
"The Apache tribe was the last tribe to surrender to the oncoming U.S. government, and at the time we wor ried that the big companies would come in and 'civilize' the landscape that the early Internet engineers built.
So 'Apache' made sense to me as a good code name, and others said it also would make a good pun"as in the APAtCHy server, because they were patching all these fixes together.
So in many ways, Behlendorf and his open-source colleaguesmost of whom he had never met but knew only by e-mail through their opensource chat roomhad created a virtual, online, bottom-up software fac tory, which no one owned and no one supervised.
"Most software development involves a source code repository and is managed by tools such as the Concurrent Versions System," he explained.
"So there is a CVS server out there, and I have a CVS program on my computer.
If I think my patch is something I want to share with others, I run a program called Patch, which allows me to create a new file, a compact collection of all the changes.
When someone makes a commit to the repository, that patch file gets e-mailed out to all the other developers, and so you get this peer review system after the fact, and if there is some thing wrong, you fix the bug."
"For Apache," said Behlendorf, "we started with eight people who really trusted each other, and as new people showed up at the discussion forum and offered patch files posted to the discussion forum, we would gain trust in others, and that eight grew to over one thousand.
Because of Apache's proficiency at allowing a single-server machine to host thousands of different virtual Web sitesmusic, data, text, pornographyit began to have "a commanding share of the Internet Service Provider market," noted Salon's Leonard.
Apache proved to be both a better technology and free.
So THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD IBM eventually decided that if it could not beat Apache, it should join Apache.
IBM "initiated contact with me, as I had a somewhat public speaker role for Apache," said Behlendorf.
"IBM said, 'We would like to figure out how we can use [Apache] and not get flamed by the Internet com munity, [how we can] make it sustainable and not just be ripping people off but contributing to the process...' IBM was saying that this new model for software development was trustworthy and valuable, so let's in vest in it and get rid of the one that we are trying to make on our own, which isn't as good."
John Swainson was the senior IBM executive who led the team that approached Apache (he's now chairman of Computer Associates).
We decided we could deal with the Apache guys because they answered our questions.
We could hold a meaningful conversation with these guys, and we were able to create the [nonprofit] Apache Software Foundation and work out all the issues."
At IBM's expense, its lawyers worked with the Apache group to create a legal framework around it so that there would be no copyright or lia bility problems for companies, like IBM, that wanted to build applica tions on top of Apache and charge money for them.
IBM saw the value in having a standard vanilla Web server architecturewhich allowed heterogeneous computer systems and devices to talk to one another, dis playing e-mail and Web pages in a standard formatthat was constantly being improved for free by an open-source community.
The Apache col laborators did not set out to make free software.
"When we started working with Apache, there was an apache.org Web site but no formal legal structure, and businesses and informal structures THE WORLD IS FLAT don't coexist well," said Swainson.
[Today] anybody can download the Apache code.
There is an Apache development process that manages the traffic, and you earn your way into that process, added Swainson.
When IBM started using Apache, it became part of the community and started making contributions.
Indeed, the one thing the Apache people demanded in return for their collaboration with IBM was that IBM assign its best engineers to join the Apache open-source group and contribute, like everyone else, for free.
"The Apache people were not interested in payment of cash," said Swainson.
Our engineers came to us and said, These guys who do Apache are good and they are insisting that we contribute good people.'
On June 22,1998, IBM announced plans to incorporate Apache into its own new Web server product, named WebSphere.
The way the Apache collaborative community organized itself, whatever you took out of Apache's code and improved on, you had to give back to the whole community.
But you were also free to go out and build a patented com mercial product on top of the Apache code, as IBM did, provided that you included a copyright citation to Apache in your own patent.
In other words, this intellectual commons approach to open-sourcing encour aged people to build commercial products on top of it.
Today Apache is one of the most successful open-source tools, pow ering about two-thirds of the Web sites in the world.
And because Apache can be downloaded for free anywhere in the world, people from Russia to South Africa to Vietnam use it to create Web sites.
Those individuals who need or want added capabilities for their Web servers can buy prod ucts like WebSphere, which attach right on top of Apache.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD At the time, selling a product built on top of an open-source program was a risky move on IBM's part.
To its credit, IBM was confident in its abil ity to keep producing differentiated software applications on top of the Apache vanilla.
This model has since been widely adopted, after everyone saw how it propelled IBM's Web server business to commercial leadership in that category of software, generating huge amounts of revenue.
As I will repeat in this book: There is no future in vanilla for most companies in a flat world.
Jack Messman, chairman of the Novell software company, which has now become a big distributor of Linux, the open-source op erating system, atop which Novell attaches gizmos to make it sing and dance just for your company, put it best: "Commercial software com panies have to start operating further up the [software] stack to differ entiate themselves.
The open source community is basically focusing on infrastructure" (Financial Times, June 14, 2004).
Big Blue was saying that it be lieved in the open-source model and that with the Apache Web server, this open-source community of engineers had created something that was not just useful and valuable but "best in its class."
"It doesn't matter where you come from or where you aresomeone in India or South America can be just as ef fective using this software or contributing to it as someone in Silicon Valley."
The other big form of community-developed software is the free soft ware movement.
According to the openknowledge.org Web site, "The free/open source software movement began in the 'hacker' culture of U.S. computer science laboratories (Stanford, Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, THE WORLD IS FLAT and MIT) in the 1960s and 1970s.
The community of programmers was small and close-knit.
To withhold code was con sidered gaucheafter all, you benefited from the work of yourfriends,you should return the favor."
The free software movement, however, was and remains inspired by the ethical ideal that software should be free and avail able to all, and it relies on open-source collaboration to help produce the best software possible to be distributed for free.
The primary goal of the free software movement is to get as many people as possible writing, improving, and distributing software for free, out of a conviction that this will empower everyone and free individuals from the grip of global corporations.
In 1984, according to Wikipedia, an MIT researcher and ex-hacker, Richard Stallman, launched the "free software movement" along with an effort to build a free operating system called GNU.
In 1991, a student at the University of Helsinki named Linus Torvalds, building off Stallman's initiative, posted his Linux operating system to compete with the Microsoft Windows operating system and invited other pro grammers online to try to improve itfor free.
Since Torvalds's initial post, programmers all over the world have manipulated, added to, ex panded, patched, and improved the GNU/Linux operating system, whose license says anyone can download the source code and improve upon it, but then must make the upgraded version freely available to everybody else.
Torvalds insists that Linux must always be free.
Therefore, commer cial software companies that sell improvements that enhance or adapt Linux have to be careful not to combine and/or distribute any of Linux's copyrighted code in their commercial products.
The General Public License under which Linux code, and other free software, is written and distributed requires that if you combine new code with Linux and redis tribute it, then you are obligated to make the modified or combined work available to the community for free.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Much like Microsoft Windows, Linux offers a family of operating sys tems that can be adapted to run on the smallest desktop computers, lap tops, PalmPilots, and even wristwatches, all the way up to the largest supercomputers and mainframes.
So a kid in India with a cheap PC can learn the inner workings of the same operating system that is running in some of the largest data centers of corporate America.
As I was working on this segment of the book, I went to a picnic one afternoon at the Virginia country home of Pamela and Malcolm Baldwin, whom my wife came to know through her membership on the board of World Learn ing, an educational NGO.
The Baldwins' son Peter hap pened to be working in Mali as part of something called the GeekCorps, which helps to bring technology to developing countries.
A few days af ter the lunch, I received an e-mail from Pamela telling me that she had consulted with Peter about accompanying me to Timbuktu, and then she added the following, which told me everything I needed to know: "Peter says that his project is creating wireless networks via satellite, mak ing antennas out of plastic soda bottles and mesh from window screens!
Apparently everyone in Mali uses Linux .
The free software movement has become a challenge to Microsoft and some other big global software players.
As Fortune magazine re ported (February 23, 2004), "The availability of this basic, powerful soft ware, which works on Intel's ubiquitous microprocessors, coincided with the explosive growth of the Internet.
Linux soon began to gain a global following among programmers and business users .
The revolution goes far beyond little Linux .
The SourceForge.net website, a meeting place for programmers, lists an astounding 86,000 programs in progress.
If you hate shelling out $350 for Microsoft Office or $600 for Adobe Photoshop, OpenOffice.org and the Gimp are surprisingly highquality free alternatives."
Big companies like Google, E T r a d e , and Amazon, by combining Intel-based commodity server components and THE WORLD IS FLAT the Linux operating system, have been able to cut their technology spending dramaticallyand get more control over their software.
Truth be told, though, while Linux and Apache began as pure forms of community-developed software, uploaded by self-generating collabo rative communities, it wasn't long before Apache became a kind of "blended model," thanks to its collaboration with IBM.
At the same time, we are now seeing venture capitalists actually funding open-source start-upspaying software companies to put out some program for free in the hope that a community will develop around it, so that the start-up company can sell additional bells and whis tles to the community for profit.
Red Hat, for instance, helps support the development of Linux and other open-source solutions and has created a business around it.
Red Hat won't sell you Linux per sethat's not allowedbut for a fee it will provide support and customize Linux for your business.
Talented open-source community software developers have only so much time, inclination, energy, and resources to put into developing code for free.
In the case of Linux, it is wonderful that people in Mali can download the software for free, but Linux is not really being developed for free any more.
IBM does not sell an operating system that competes with Linux.
But IBM sells software that competes with Microsoft's.
So IBM is very happy to pay quality software engineers to work on Linux in order to encourage its expansion as a com petitor to Microsoft Windowsand thereby cut into Microsoft's profits, weakening its ability to compete with IBM in its areas of specialty.
Sun Microsystems set up OpenOffice.org for the same reason.
The important thing, from the consumer's point of view, is that these blended models of community-developed software are driving more competition and producing cheaper, if not free, software for the public.
Needless to say, the whole notion of community-developed software is hotly debated around Microsoft.
Here's what I took away from my discussions in Redmond: In Microsoft's view, the blended model that has evolved out of the community software movement is really just a new form of commercial competition, and no one should have any illusions about it.
Whatever the founders of the community-developed software movement may have intended or hoped forin terms of profit-free community-developed softwarethat is not what has actually developed.
Community-based software development is now a business, one that holds potential for Microsoft as for every other company.
Having said that, the Microsoft executives I spoke with still believe that this form of software has its limitations and will not, or should not, make the traditional, commercial software industry obsoletefor several reasons.
To begin with, Microsoft argues that if innovators are not going to be financially rewarded for their innovations, the incentive for pathbreaking innovation will eventually dry up and so will the money for the really deep R & D that is required to drive progress in this increasingly complex field.
Microsoft's success in creating the standard PC operating system produced the bankroll that allowed Microsoft to spend billions of dollars on R & D to develop Microsoft Office, a whole suite of applica tions that it can now sell for a couple hundred dollars.
As Craig Mundie, the Microsoft chief technical officer, put it: "The virtuous cycle of inno vation, reward, reinvestment, and more innovation is what has driven all big breakthroughs in our industry.
He continued: "It is true that scientific research will increasingly require more of a community effort, but I would argue this is more of a requirement for multidisciplinary collaboration due to the com plexity of the problems, rather than a belief that the fundamental insights that lead to real innovation come from groups now rather than individu als.
I believe that open-source will continue as a powerful trend but will revert primarily to the intellectual commons model that has long been with us in academia, rather than one that removes the financial incentive to do software."
As for Microsoft's founder Bill Gates, he too is obviously convinced that the future of software is not in free.
"You need capitalism [to drive innovation].
To have [a movement] that says innovation does not deserve an economic reward is contrary to where the world is going.
As such, says Microsoft, there will still be plenty of room for proprietary software systems.
There is a big advantage to students and companies that you can go any where in the world today, fire up a computer, and find a standardized Microsoft Word program to write your business report or essay on.
I would not want to have to wrestle with a different word processing pro gram everywhere I went.
But the reason I think community-developed software is also here to stay is that while it may not be sustainable without an economic in- THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD centive at some point, as a sheer tool for making breakthroughs and spreading those breakthroughs virally, it has proved to be very powerful.
Until 2004, the Linux operating system was the best-known opensource software challenging Microsoft.
Then, in November 2004, the Mozilla Foundation, a nonprofit group supporting open-source soft ware, released Firefox, a free, fast, easy-to-install Web browser loaded with features that Microsoft's Internet Explorer lacked.
Donations from Firefox's appreciative new users paid for a two-page advertisement in The New York Times.
"With Firefox," Stross added, "open-source software moves from backoffice obscurity to your home, and to your parents', too.
It is polished [and] as easy to use as Internet Explorer."
By November 2005, its first anniversary, the Firefox browser had gobbled up roughly 10 percent of the worldwide browser market, most of it coming out of Microsoft Explorer's hide.
One reason Firefox spread so fast is its community-development aspect: Users could contribute to how it developed, and many extensions that added specific new applications to the browser were written by users.
By No vember 2005, a new souped-up version, Firefox 1.5, was on the march.
This explosive growth is quite amazing when you realize how Firefox came about.
Firefox is actually a descendant of Mosaic and the original Netscape Navigator browser, which was overwhelmed by Microsoft Internet Explorer in 1998.
While Firefox, like any other piece of opensource software, is the product of many different programmers' improve ments and insights, noted Wired magazine (February 2005), "two people in particular are most responsible for the browser's success: Blake Ross, an angular hyper-kinetic 19-year-old Stanford sophomore with spikey black hair, and Ben Goodger, a stout, soft-spoken 24-year-old New Zealander.
At age 14, Ross, logging on to his family's America Online ac count, started fixing bugs for the Mozilla Group, a cadre of programmers responsible for maintaining the source code of Netscape's browsers.
Ross quickly became disenchanted with Netscape's feature creep [too many bells and whistles], and in 2002 he brashly decided to splinter off and THE WORLD IS FLAT develop a pared-down, fast, easy-to-use browser.
Goodger pulled the project's loose ends together and whipped the browser into shape for the release of Firefox 1.0 late last year [2004]."
So a nineteen-year-old from Stanford and a twenty-four-year-old from New Zealand, working in an open-source community for free, starting from two ends of the world, produced a browser that took 5 percent of the Internet Explorer market in about six months.
I particularly liked what Ross told Wired about how it felt when hefirststarted uploading, when he first started hacking away at Mozilla as a ninth grader: "It was incredible just realizing that you can touch something that so many people use.
There is no better description of the allure of uploadingas opposed to just downloading.
In time, I think we will see a new equilibrium emerge in which all the different forms of software will have a place: traditional commercial software,  la Microsoft or SAP, along with the Business Web model of rent-a-software,  la Salesforce.com, along with free software produced either by funded communities or by inspired individuals.
COMMUNITY-DEVELOPED ANSWERS Brian Behlendorf, for his part, is betting his career that more and more people and companies will want to take advantage of the new flat-world platform to do community-developed innovation of all sorts of products.
In 2004, he started a new company called CollabNet to promote the use of community development as a tool to drive software innovation within companies.
What CollabNet does, for example, is to create a secure Web THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD site, where those with a password can go and see the source code of the software and the defects that need to be addressed, and then participate in a discussion among engineers, product managers, and customer support on how the software should be improved.
"CollabNet is an arms dealer to the forces flattening the world," said Behlendorf.
"Our role in this world is to build the tools and infrastructure so that an individual in India, China, or whereveras a consultant, an em ployee, or just someone sitting at home, can collaborate.
We are giving them the tool kit for decentralized collaborative development.
While CollabNet is primarily focused on how to enable a corporation to col laborate internally to produce its own open-source software and keep it fresh, there are a variety of businesses besides software that are now dis covering what happens if you can tap the innovative power of the com munity.
One creative variation on this open-source approach was the attempt a couple of years ago by a Canadian gold-mining company, Goldcorp Inc., to try to tap "all of us" to find its gold deposits.
According to the June 2002 issue of Fast Company.
This time, the fortune hunters wielded geologicalmodeling software and database mining tools rather than picks and shovels.
The big winners were from Australia.
THE WORLD IS FLAT The mining community was flabbergasted.
"We've seen very large data sets from government surveys online," says Nick Archibald, managing director of Fractal Graphics, the winning organization from West Perth, Australia.
McEwen knew that the contest, which he called the Goldcorp Challenge, entailed big risks.
As a young man, he went to work for Merrill Lynch, following his father into the investment business.
Soon he was bitten by the gold bug too, and he ham mered out a template of what he thought a 21st-century gold-mining company should look like.
Eventually, the group's attention turned to the Linux operating system and the open-source revolution.
His reasoning: If he could attract the attention of world-class talent to the problem of finding more gold in Red Lake, just as Linux managed to attract world-class programmers to the cause of better software, he could tap into thousands of minds that he wouldn't normally have access to.
"This is a very conser vative, very private industry," says Dr. James M. Franklin, former chief geoscientist for the Geological Survey of Canada and a judge in the Goldcorp Challenge.
But in March 2000, at an industry meeting, McEwen un veiled the Goldcorp Challenge.
The top winner was a collaboration by two groups in Australia: Fractal Graphics, in West Perth, and Taylor Wall & Associates, in Queensland, which together had developed a pow erful 3-D graphical depiction of the mine.
As for the open-source miners who won the competition, Fast Company noted how much this opportunity meant for them as well: Red Lake, Ontario and West Perth, Australia are at opposite ends of the earth.
But that didn't stop Nick Archibald and his team of geologists at Fractal Graphics, an Australian geoscience consult ing firm, from thinking that they could find gold in Canada.
First-place winners of the 2001 Goldcorp Challenge, Archi bald and his mates shared a grand prize of $105,000 for their pre sentation detailing likely targets for finding gold.
"I'd never even been to Canada."
"This has been a big change for mining," he says.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD BLOGGING: UPLOADING NEWS AND COMMENTARY Soon after the community-developed software movement gained momen tum, we witnessed the emergence of another bottom-up, self-organized form of uploading: blogging.
In an arti cle about how a tiny group of relatively obscure news bloggers helped to blow the whistle that exposed the bogus documents used by CBS News's Dan Rather in his infamous report about President George W. Bush's Air National Guard service, Howard Kurtz of The Washington Post wrote (September 20, 2004), "It was like throwing a match on kerosene-soaked wood.
Mark Glaser, a freelance writer based in San Francisco, writing for the Web site YaleGlobal Online (July 28, 2005), noted that on July 7, the day of the London underground bombings, the BBC Web site in vited viewers and listeners to send in photos of what they had seen.
"In 24 hours," he wrote, "the site received 20,000 written accounts via e-mail, 1,000 photos, and 20 videos.
The BBC, the Guardian, and MSNBC.com were among the big media sites that walked the walk of citizen journalism, allowing their readers to become contributors on a moment's noticewith zero journalistic training."
The BBC was both harnessing the power of uploading and channeling it into useful editorial content.
The BBC's willingness to open itself to bloggers shows both the strength and weakness of blogging, and why it is still not clear how it will affect traditional journalism.
If you look at the Facebook.com phenomenon, an online social directory spreading virally in high schools and colleges, millions of young people now have a platform for telling their own stories.
"More than 2 million children aged 6-17 have their own Web site, ac cording to a December 2003 survey by Grunwald Associates.
Twentynine percent of kids in grades K-3 have their own e-mail address.
Josh Koenig, one of the twenty-somethings who cut their teeth at the Dean campaign and now a co-founder of Music for America, says, 'We're only seeing the first drips of what is going to be a downpour.'
The audio version of blogging, known as "podcasting," has really taken off.
Podcasts involve individuals and companies producing their own audio and video files music, commentary, books, poetry readings, singing recitals, anything you can imagine that can be done by voice or videowhich can then be uploaded onto platforms, like Apple iTunes.
Podcasting is having a big impact on traditional music and video companies and radio stations, because so many people now have the power to become video and mu sic producers, not just passive listeners and viewers.
The video-sharing site YouTube illustrates just how popular upload ing has become.
YouTube was founded by some former employees of PayPal in February 2005, just after the first edition of this book was com pleted.
In October 2006, not long after the second edition of this book came out, YouTube was sold to Google for $1.65 billion.
The YouTube Web site enables users to upload, view, and share videos, parts of movies, THE WORLD IS FLAT T V clips, music videos, lectures, or comic performances made by them selves or others.
And, indeed, some YouTube artists now have huge audiences.
It would be impossible to catalog all the uses of YouTube (even terror ist organizations are now using it to spread their messages).
My favorites are those that underscore just how much uploading is empowering the lit tle guys and gals.
Consider the following story from The New York Times Magazine (December 10, 2006): "As long as there have been personal fouls and holding penalties, sports fans have vilified referees for making bad calls.
But in recent years, criticizing the officials of the major profes sional and college sports has evolved from a crude art form'Ref, if you had one more eye you'd be a cyclops!
And with the rise of YouTube, sophisti cated methods of scrutinizing, publicizing and condemning those errors have emerged.
These days, just hours after the end of a game marred by questionable officiating, fans of the aggrieved team take to the Web, col lecting clips of bad calls and stringing them together into short videos.
Many of the clips use slow-motion analysis, a feature that led a writer at Slate magazine to dub the genre 'the YouTube Zapruder film.'
The most persuasive videos are those that edit down the footage of an en tire game to only its controversial calls.
A few minutes of watching how seemingly every decision in Game 5 of the Dallas Mavericks-Houston Rockets playoff series last year was overly generous to Dallas can turn even the most indifferent observer into a conspiracy theorist.
The officiating blunder that seemed to inspire the most videos this year was the fourthquarter onside kick that helped decide the Oregon-Oklahoma football game.
The response on YouTube was swift and vitriolic.
was the title of one video.
The NFL recently asked THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD YouTube to take down thousands of videos containing footage of its games, including many that were critical of the officiating."
WIKIPEDIA: COMMUNITY-UPLOADED CONTENT Another form of uploaded community development that I used regularly in writing this book is Wikipedia, the user-contributed online encyclo pedia, also known as "the people's encyclopedia."
In a May 5, 2004, essay on YaleGlobal Online, Andrew Lih, an as sistant professor at the Journalism and Media Studies Centre at the University of Hong Kong, explained how Wikipedia works and why it is such a breakthrough.
"The Wikipedia project was started by Jimmy Wales, head of Internet startup Bomis.com, after his original project for a volunteer, but strictly controlled, free encyclopedia ran out of money and resources after two years," wrote Lih.
Not wanting the content to languish, Wales placed the pages on a wiki Web site in January 2001 and invited any Internet visitors to edit or add to the col lection.
After all, every article in the Wikipedia has an "Edit this page" button, allowing anyone who surfs along to add or delete content on that page.
Its success starts with the fact, Lih explained, that "because wikis provide the ability to track the status of articles, review individual changes, and discuss issues, they function as social software.
Wikipedia works by consensus, with users adding and modifying content while trying to reach common ground along the way.
According to Wikipedia's guide lines, T h e neutral point of view attempts to present ideas and facts in such a fashion that both supporters and opponents can agree .
As a result, articles on contentious issues such as globalization have bene fited from the cooperative and global nature of Wikipedia.
Over the last two years, the entry has had more than 90 edits by contributors from the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, United Kingdom, Australia, Brazil, United States, Malaysia, Japan and China.
A Newsweek piece on Wikipedia (November 1, 2004) quoted Angela Beesley, a volunteer contributor from Essex, England, and self-confessed Wikipedia addict who monitors the accuracy of more than one thousand entries: "A collaborative encyclopedia sounds like a crazy idea, but it naturally controls itself."
By the end of 2005, Wikipedia was getting 2.5 billion page views a month, which made it one of the most visited refer ence sites on the Web, along with Dictionary.com.
Then you really thought it was cool when you got yourfirstcopy of Encarta with Microsoft Windows and could click on to your own en cyclopedia.
The online ad for the latest edition of Encarta reads as fol lows: "Microsoft Encarta Standard 2006 is the number-one best-selling encyclopedia brand.
It's a source you can trust for exploring a world of knowledge that's accurate, engaging, and up to datewith over 36,000 articles, tens of thousands of pictures and sound clips, videos, anima tions, games, maps, and more."
Do you know how many articles there are in Wikipedia, the uploaded encyclopedia?
As I write these words on November 29, 2005, the Wikipedia.org Web site reported: "In this En glish version, started in 2001, we are currently working on 841,358 arti cles"and counting.
Wikipedia, though, is not all sweetness and light, and it does not al ways control itself.
John Seigenthaler Sr., the founding editor ial director of USA Today and founder of the Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, woke up one morning and found his bio on Wikipedia as follows: "John Seigenthaler Sr. was the assistant to Attorney General Robert Kennedy in the early 1960's.
This is a highly personal story about Internet character assassina tion.
There was more: "John Seigenthaler moved to the Soviet Union in 1971, and re turned to the United States in 1984," Wikipedia said.
"He started one of the country's largest public relations firms shortly thereafter."
THE WORLD IS FLAT I had heard for weeks from teachers, journalists and historians about "the wonderful world of Wikipedia," where millions of people worldwide visit daily for quick reference "facts," composed and posted by people with no special expertise or knowledge and sometimes by people with malice.
I phoned Jimmy Wales, Wikipedia's founder, and asked, "Do you .
Representatives of the other two web sites said their computers are programmed to copy data verbatim from Wikipedia, never checking whether it is false or factual... We live in a universe of new media with phenomenal oppor tunities for worldwide communications and researchbut popu lated by volunteer vandals with poison-pen intellects.
For me, that pillow is a metaphor for Wikipedia.
I like Wikipedia.
It is not an accident that IBM today has a senior staffer who po lices Wikipedia's references to IBM and makes sure that everything that gets in there is correct.
More young people will learn about IBM from Wikipedia in coming years than from IBM itself.
It is spreading because the flat-world platform that makes it possible is spreading and because uploading responds to a very deep human longing for individuals to participate and make their voices heard.
New York Times reporter Seth Schiesel wrote a telling piece in this regard (June 21, 2005), in which he noted that growing numbers of young men "would rather play a sports video game than watch the real thing on television."
He pointed out that since 2000, sales of sports video games in the United States have risen by 34 percent, to $1.2 billion in 2004, while television broadcast ratings for almost all ma jor sports have fallen among male viewers between twelve and thirtyfour.
But what struck me most about the article was a quote Schiesel had from a young man who loved to play the NBA-branded video bas ketball games, in which you can control when the players (patterned af ter actual NBA players) pass and shoot: "1 like Kobe, O.K.?'
Albert Arce said, referring to Kobe Bryant, the Los Angeles Lakers star.
That attitude, says Micah Sifry, "is indicative of the larger shift in the Internet age away from a static and passive approach to media to an active and participatory ap roach.
He sug ests that the companies that design their software, their systems, their eb sites, and their encyclopedias to encourage participation will be the nes that draw the most users.
eople like to upload, and that is why of all the ten forces flattening he world, uploading has the potential to be the most disruptive.
Just ow many people will exercise that ability to be in the game, and how oon, is what will determine just how disruptive uploading becomes.
ut as the tools for individual uploading and collaboration become ore diffused, and as more and more people get positive feedback from heir uploading experiences, I am certain every big institution or hierar hical structure will feel the effects.
ntil recently, India was what is known in the banking world as "the econd buyer."
You always want to be the second buyer in businessthe erson who buys the hotel or the golf course or the shopping mall after he first owner has gone bankrupt and its assets are being sold by the bank t ten cents on the dollar.
Well, the first buyers of all the cable laid by all hose fiber-optic cable companieswhich thought they were going to et endlessly rich in an endlessly expanding digital universewere their merican shareholders.
The Indians, in effect, got to e the second buyers of the fiber-optics companies.
This was a uge stroke of luck for India (and to a lesser degree for China, the former oviet Union, and Eastern Europe), because what is the history of mod- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD rn India?
While India certainly had natural resources to mine (coal, ron ore, diamonds), with so many mouths to feed, it couldn't just live off hem not even close.
So instead India mined the brains of its own peo le, educating a relatively large slice of its elites in the sciences, engi eering, and medicine.
In 1951, to his enduring credit, Jawaharlal ehru, India's first prime minister, set up the first of India's seven Indian nstitutes of Technology (IIT) in the eastern city of Kharagpur.
In the ifty-five years since then, hundreds of thousands of Indians have com eted to gain entry and then graduate from these IITs and their privatesector equivalents (as well as the six Indian Institutes of Management, hich teach business administration).
Given India's one-billion-plus opulation, this competition produces a phenomenal knowledge meri ocracy.
his, alas, was one of the few things India did right.
Because its often ysfunctional political system, coupled with Nehru's preference for proSoviet, Socialist economics, ensured that up until the mid-1990s India ould not provide good jobs for most of those talented engineers.
So merica got to be the second buyer of India's brainpower!
If you were a mart, educated Indian, the only way you could fulfill your potential was y leaving the country and, ideally, going to America, where some wenty-five thousand graduates of India's top engineering schools have ettled since 1953, greatly enriching America's knowledge pool thanks to heir education, which was subsidized by Indian taxpayers.
The IITs became islands of excellence by not allowing the general ebasement of the Indian system to lower their exacting standards," noted he Wall Street Journal (April 16, 2003).
Arguably, it is harder to get into an IIT han into Harvard or the Massachusetts Institute of Technology... IIT lumnus Vinod Khosla, who co-founded Sun Microsystems, said: 'When  finished IIT Delhi and went to Carnegie Mellon for my Masters, I hought I was cruising all the way because it was so easy relative to the ed cation I got at IIT' " HE WORLD IS FLAT or most of their first fifty years, these IITs were one of the greatest argains America ever had.
Roughly one of our IIT grads ended up in the United Statesso many that the merican IIT expats have their own organization in the United States nd hold an annual convention here.
nd then along came Netscape, the 1996 telecom deregulation, and lobal Crossing and its fiber-optic friends.
"India had no resources and no nfrastructure," said Dinakar Singh, one of the most respected young edge fund managers on Wall Street, whose parents graduated from an IT and then immigrated to America, where he was bom.
But many of them rotted on the ocks of India like vegetables.
For decades you had to leave India to be a profes ional .
Now you can plug into the world from India.
You don't have to o to Yale and go to work for Goldman Sachs [as I did.]"
ndia could never have afforded to pay for the bandwidth to connect rainy India with high-tech America, so American shareholders paid for t. Sure, overinvestment can be good.
India got to ride for free.
t is fun to talk to Indians who were around at precisely the moment hen American companies started to discover they could draw on India's rainpower in India.
One of them is Vivek Paul, now the president of ipro, the Indian software giant.
"In many ways the Indian information echnology [outsourcing] revolution began with General Electric com ng over.
At the time, Texas nstruments was doing some chip design in India.
Some of their key de igners [in America] were Indians, and they basically let them go back ome and work from there [using the rather crude communications etworks that existed then to stay in touch].
[GE's chair an] Jack Welch came to India in 1989 and was completely taken by ndia as a source of intellectual advantage for GE.
Jack would say, 'India s a developing country with a developed intellectual capability.'
" Because India had closed its market to foreign technology com anies, like IBM, Indian companies had started their own factories to ake PCs and servers, and Welch felt that if they could do it for them elves, they could do it for G E .
o pursue the project, Welch sent a team headed by GE's chief in ormation officer over to India to check out the possibilities.
Paul was lso filling in as GE's business development manager for India at the ime.
I remember in the middle of the night going to pick hem up at the Delhi airport with a caravan of Indian cars, Ambassadors, ased on a very dated 1950s Morris Minor design.
rtunately for India, the G E team was not discouraged by the poor uality of Indian cars.
Other companies were trying different odels.
Simon & Schuster, the ook publisher, for instance, would ship its books over to India and pay ndians $50 a month (compared to $1,000 a month in the United States) o type them by hand into computers, converting the books into digitized lectronic files that could be edited or amended easily in the future HE WORLD IS FLAT articularly dictionaries, which constantly need updating.
In 1991, anmohan Singh, then India's finance minister, began opening the ndian economy for foreign investment and introducing competition nto the Indian telecom industry to bring down prices.
To attract more oreign investment, Singh made it much easier for companies to set up atellite downlink stations in Bangalore, so they could skip over the ndian phone system and connect with their home bases in America, urope, or Asia.
Before then, only Texas Instruments had been willing to rave the Indian bureaucracy, becoming the first multinational to estab ish a circuit design and development center in India in 1985.
TI's cen er in Bangalore had its own satellite downlink but had to suffer through aving an Indian government official to oversee itwith the right to ex mine any piece of data going in or out.
A short time later, in 1994, HealthScribe India, a company riginally funded in part by Indian-American doctors, was set up in angalore to do outsourced medical transcription for American doctors nd hospitals.
HealthScribe et up a system that turned a doctor's touch-tone phone into a dictation achine.
Because of the twelve-hour time difference with ndia, Indians could do the transcription while the American, doctors ere sleeping, and the file would be ready and waiting the next morning.
his was an important breakthrough for companies, because if you ould safely, legally, and securely transcribe from Bangalore medical ecords, lab reports, and doctors' diagnosesin one of the most litigious ndustries in the worlda lot of other industries could think about send ng some of their backroom work to be done in India as well.
(Ironically, said Gurujot Singh Khalsa, one of the ounders of HealthScribe, they initially explored having Indians in ainethat is, American Indiansdo this work, using some of the fed ral money earmarked for the tribes to get started, but they could never et them interested enough to put the deal together.)
The cost of doing he transcription in India was about one-fifth the cost per line of doing it n the United States, a difference that got a lot of people's attention.
y the late 1990s, though, Lady Luck was starting to shine on India rom two directions: The fiber-optic bubble was starting to inflate, link ng India with the United States, and the Y2K computer crisisthe socalled millennium bugstarted gathering on the horizon.
Answer: India, with all he techies from all those IITs and private technical colleges and com uter schools.
nd so with Y2K bearing down on us, America and India started dat ng, and that relationship became a huge flattener, because it demon trated to so many different businesses that the combination of the PC, the nternet, and fiber-optic cable had created the possibility of a whole new orm of collaboration and horizontal value creation: outsourcing.
"So all hese Western companies were incredibly challenged to find someone lse who would do it and do it for as little money as possible.
So they started to work ith Indian [technology] companies who they might not have worked ith otherwise."
o use my parlance, they were ready to go on a blind date with India.
For Indian industry, it represented the biggest pportunity.
India was considered as a place of backward people.
And the sheer number of people needed to review line-by-line ode existed in India.
The Indian IT industry got its footprint across the lobe because of Y2K.
We never looked back after Y2K."
y early 2000, the Y2K work started to wind down, but then a whole ew driver of business emergede-commerce.
So they turned to the Indian companies, and as hey turned to the Indian companies they found that they were getting de ivery of complex systems, with great quality, sometimes better than what hey were getting from others.
utsourcing from America to India, as a new form of collaboration, xploded.
By just stringing a fiber-optic line from a workstation in HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD angalore to my company's mainframe, I could have Indian IT firms like ipro, Infosys, and Tata Consulting Services managing my e-commerce nd mainframe applications.
But again, India was lucky hat it could exploit all that undersea fiber-optic cable.
The boom laid the able that connected India to the world, and the bust made the cost of us ng it virtually free and also vastly increased the number of American ompanies that would want to use that fiber-optic cable to outsource nowledge work to India.
2K led to this mad rush for Indian brainpower to get the programming ork done.
The Indian companies were good and cheap, but price wasn't irst on customers' mindsgetting the work done was, and India was the nly place with the volume of workers to do it.
Then the dot-com boom omes along right in the wake of Y2K, and India is one of the few places here you can find surplus English-speaking engineers, at any price, be ause all of those in America have been scooped up by e-commerce com anies.
American IT companies that survived he boom and venture capital firms that still wanted to fund start-ups had uch less cash to spend.
Now they needed those Indian engineers not just HE WORLD IS FLAT ecause there were a lot of them, but precisely because they were low-cost.
o the relationship between India and the American business community ntensified another notch.
romod Haque, an Indian American and one of the most prominent enture capitalists in Silicon Valley with his firm Norwest Venture artners, was in the middle of this transition.
"When the bust took place,  lot of these Indian engineers in the U.S. [on temporary work visas] got aid off, so they went back to India," explained Haque.
He says, 'You remember ijay from India who used to work here during the boom and then went ack home?
he Y2K computer readjustment work was done largely by low-skilled ndian programmers right out of tech schools, said Haque, "but the guys n visas who were coming to America were not trade school guys.
So a lot of our companies aw that these guys were good at Java and C++ and architectural design ork for computers, and then they got laid off and went back home, and he IT manager back here who is told, 'I don't care how you get the job one, just get it done for less money,' calls Vijay."
Once America and ndia were dating, the burgeoning Indian IT companies in Bangalore tarted coming up with their own proposals.
The Y2K work had allowed hem to interact with some pretty large companies in the United States, nd as a result they began to understand the pain points and how to do HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD usiness-process implementation and improvement.
So the Indians, who ere doing a lot of very specific custom code maintenance to highervalue-add companies, started to develop their own products and trans orm themselves from maintenance to product companies, offering a ange of software services and consulting.
This took Indian companies uch deeper inside American ones, and business-process outsourcingletting Indians run your back roomwent to a whole new level.
"I have n accounts payable department and I could move this whole thing to ndia under Wipro or Infosys and cut my costs in half," said Haque.
And the Indian companies were saying, 'I have taken a look under your ood and I will provide you with a total solution for the lowest price.'
" In ther words, the Indian outsourcing companies said, "Do you remember ow I fixed your tires and your pistons during Y2K?
To their credit, the Indians were not just cheap, hey were also hungry and ready to learn anything.
he scarcity of capital after the dot-com bust made venture capital irms see to it that the companies they were investing in were finding the ost efficient, high-quality, low-price way to innovate.
For venture firms," said Haque, "the big question became, How do I et my entrepreneurs and their new companies to a point where they are reaking even or profitable sooner, so they can stop being a draw on my apital and be sold so our firm can generate good liquidity and returns?
he answer many firms came up with was: I better start outsourcing as any functions as I can from the beginning.
Everyone HE WORLD IS FLAT ound prices flat to declining and markets stagnant, yet they were still pending huge amounts of money running the backroom operations of heir companies, which they could no longer afford.
Companies found that they could go to IT and find four incredibly smart Chinese engineers who were ready o go back to China and work for them from there for the same amount hat it would cost them to hire one engineer in America.
or all these reasons I believe that Y2K should be a national holiday in ndia, a second Indian Independence Day, in addition to August 15.
As ohns Hopkins foreign policy expert Michael Mandelbaum, who spent art of his youth in India, put it, "Y2K should be called Indian Interde endence Day," because it was India's ability to collaborate with Western ompanies, thanks to the interdependence created byfiber-opticnetworks, hat really vaulted it forward and gave more Indians than ever some real reedom of choice in how, for whom, and where they worked.
2K made possible employment at midnightbut not any employment, mployment for India's best knowledge workers.
August 15 gave indepen ence to India.
But Y2K gave independence to Indiansnot all, by any tretch of the imagination, but a lot more thanfiftyyears ago, and many of hem from the most productive segment of the population.
In that sense, es, India was lucky, but it also reaped what it had sowed through hard ork and education and the wisdom of its elders who built all those IITs.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD FFSHORING unning with Gazelles, Eating with Lions  December 11, 2001, China formally joined the World Trade ^/Organization, which meant Beijing agreed to follow the same lobal rules governing imports, exports, and foreign investments that most ountries in the world were following.
It meant China was agreeing, in rinciple, to make its own competitive playing field as level as the rest of he world.
A few days later, the American-trained Chinese manager of a uel pump factory in Beijing, which was owned by a friend of mine, Jack erkowski, the chairman and C E O of ASIMCO Technologies, an Ameri an auto parts manufacturer in China, posted the following African roverb, translated into Mandarin, on his factory floor: very morning in Africa, a gazelle wakes up.
This is because China's oining the WTO gave a huge boost to another form of collaboration  ffshoring.
Offshoring, which has been around for decades, is different rom outsourcing.
Offshoring, by contrast, is when a company akes one of its factories that it is operating in Canton, Ohio, and moves he whole factory offshore to Canton, China.
There, it produces the very HE WORLD IS FLAT ame product in the very same way, only with cheaper labor, lower taxes, ubsidized energy, and lower health-care costs.
Just as Y2K took India and he world to a whole new level of outsourcing, China's joining the WTO ook Beijing and the world to a whole new level of offshoringwith ore companies shifting production offshore and then integrating it into heir global supply chains.
n 1977, Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping put China on the road to cap talism, declaring later that "to get rich is glorious."
When China first pened its tightly closed economy, companies in industrialized countries aw it as an incredible new market for exports.
Some foreign companies set up shop in China o do just that.
But because China was not subject to world trade rules, it as able to restrict the penetration into its market by these Western com anies through various trade and investment barriers.
And when it was not oing that deliberately, the sheer bureaucratic and cultural difficulties of oing business in China had the same effect.
Many of the pioneer in estors in China lost their shirts and pants and underwearand with hina's Wild West legal system there was not much recourse.
eginning in the 1980s, many investors, particularly overseas Chinese ho knew how to operate in China, started to say, "Well, if we can't sell hat many things to the Chinese right now, why don't we use China's dis iplined labor pool to make things there and sell them abroad?"
This ovetailed with the interests of China's leaders.
China wanted to attract oreign manufacturers and their technologiesnot simply to manufac ure one billion pairs of underwear for sale in China but to use low-wage hinese labor to also sell six billion pairs of underwear to everyone else in he world, and at prices that were a fraction of what the underwear com anies in Europe or America or even Mexico were charging.
nce that offshoring process began in a range of industriesfrom extiles to consumer electronics to furniture to eyeglass frames to auto artsthe only ways other companies could compete was by offshoring o China as well (taking advantage of its low-cost, high-quality platform), r by looking for alternative manufacturing centers in Eastern Europe, he Caribbean, or somewhere else in the developing world.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD y joining the World Trade Organization in 2001, China assured oreign companies that if they shifted factories offshore to China, they ould be protected by international law and standard business prac ices.
This greatly enhanced China's attractiveness as a manufactur ng platform.
his meant that foreign companies could sell virtually anything any here in China.
At the same ime, government bureaucrats became more customer-friendly, proce ures for investments were streamlined, and Web sites proliferated in ifferent ministries to help foreigners navigate China's business regula ions.
I don't know how many Chinese actually ever bought a copy of ao's Little Red Book, but U.S. embassy officials in China told me hat two million copies of the Chinese-language edition of the W T O ule book were sold in the weeks immediately after China signed on to he WTO.
To put it another way, China under Mao was closed and iso ated from the other flattening forces of his day, and as a result Mao was eally a challenge only to his own people.
Deng Xiaoping made China pen to absorbing many of the ten flatteners and, in so doing, made hina a challenge to the whole world.
efore China signed on to the WTO, there was a sense that, while hina had opened up to get the advantages of trade with the West, the overnment and the banks would protect Chinese businesses from any rushing foreign competition, said Jack Perkowski of ASIMCO.
"China's ntry into the W T O was a signal to the community outside of China that t was now on the capitalist track for good," he added.
"Before, you had he thought in the back of your mind that there could be a turning back o state communism.
With WTO, China said, 'We are on one course.'"
ecause China can amass so many low-wage workers at the un killed, semiskilled, and skilled levels, because it has such a voracious HE WORLD IS FLAT ppetite for factory, equipment, and knowledge jobs to keep its people mployed, and because it has such a massive and burgeoning consumer arket, it has become an unparalleled zone for offshoring.
China has ore than 160 cities with a population of one million or more.
You can o to towns on the east coast of China today that you have never heard f and discover that this one town manufactures most of the eyeglass rames in the world, while the town next door manufactures most of the isposable cigarette lighters in the world, and the one next to that is do ng most of the computer screens for Dell, and another is specializing in obile phones.
The Japanese business consultant Kenichi Ohmae esti ates in his book The United States of China that in the Zhu Jiang elta area alone, north of Hong Kong, there are fifty thousand Chinese lectronics component suppliers.
China is a threat, China is a customer, and China is an opportu ity," Ohmae remarked to me one day in Tokyo.
"You have to internal ze China to succeed.
Instead of competing with hina as an enemy, argues Ohmae, you break down your business and hink about which part of the business you would like to do in China, hich part you would like to sell to China, and which part you want to uy from China.
ere we get to the real flattening aspect of China's opening to the orld market.
The more attractive China makes itself as a base for off horing, the more attractive other developed and developing countries ompeting with it, like Malaysia, Thailand, Ireland, Mexico, Brazil, and ietnam, have to make themselves.
This has created a process f competitive flattening, in which countries scramble to see who can ive companies the best tax breaks, education incentives, and subsidies, n top of their cheap labor, to encourage offshoring to their shores.
hio State University business professor Oded Shenkar, author of he book The Chinese Century, told BusinessWeek (December 6, 2004) hat he gives it to American companies straight: "If you still make any hing labor intensive, get out now rather than bleed to death.
China's flattening power is also fueled by the fact that it is develop ng a huge domestic market of its own.
The same BusinessWeek article oted that this brings economies of scale, intense local rivalries that keep rices low, an army of engineers that is growing by 350,000 annually, oung workers and managers willing to put in twelve-hour days, an un aralleled component base in electronics and light industry, "and an en repreneurial zeal to do whatever it takes to please big retailers such as al-Mart Stores, Target, Best Buy and J.C.
hile visiting Beijing in the fall of 2005, I met with Charles M. artin, president of the American Chamber of Commerce for the eople's Republic of China.
This manufacturer produces ocks and ladies' underwear for mass merchandisers around the world, as ell as retailers within China.
ventually, there will be no more inland China for factories to shift nto, and China's manufacturers will not be able to lower their costs any urther by just movingbut we are not there yet, which is why China is uch a leveling force for manufacturing and why cutting your costs by  percent here or there, if you are a Western manufacturer of any basic ommodity item, just won't do it.
ritics of China's business practices say that its size and economic ower mean that it will soon be setting the global floor not only for low ages but also for lax labor laws and workplace standards.
This is known n the business as "the China price."
ut what is really scary is that China is not attracting so much global in estment by simply racing everyone to the bottom.
This is due to China s absorption of both new tech ologies and modern business practices, starting from a very low base.
ncidentally, the Conference Board study noted, China lost fifteen mil ion manufacturing jobs during this period, compared with two million n the United States.
China's lead rs are much more focused than many of their Western counterparts on ow to train their young people in the math, science, and computer skills equired for success in the flat world, how to build a physical and tele om infrastructure that will allow Chinese people to plug and play faster nd easier than others, and how to create incentives that will attract lobal investors.
What China's leaders really want is the next generation f underwear or airplane wings to be designed in China as well.
So in thirty years we will ave gone from "sold in China" to "made in China" to "designed in hina" to "dreamed up in China" or from China as collaborator with he worldwide manufacturers on nothing to China as a low-cost, highquality, hyperefficient collaborator with worldwide manufacturers on verything.
This should allow China to maintain its role as a major flat ening force, provided that political instability does not disrupt the rocess.
What caught my eye was its November 5, 2001, article eadlined "China to Become Center of Everything."
It quoted a China eople's Daily article that claimed that four hundred out of the Forbes 00 companies have invested in more than two thousand projects in ainland China.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD apan, being right next door to China, has taken a very aggressive ap roach to internalizing the China challenge.
Osamu Watanabe, chair an of the Japan External Trade Organization, Japan's official organ for romoting exports, told me in Tokyo, "China is developing very rapidly nd making the shift from low-grade products to high-grade, high-tech nes."
As a result, added Watanabe, Japanese companies, to remain lobally competitive, have had to shift some production and a lot of as embly of middle-range products to China, while shifting at home to aking "even higher value-added products."
So China and Japan "are ecoming part of the same supply chain."
After a prolonged recession, apan's economy started to bounce back in 2003, due to the sale of thou ands of tons of machinery, assembly robots, and other critical compo ents in China.
In 2003, China replaced the United States as the biggest mporter of Japanese products.
Still, the Japanese government is urging ts companies to be careful not to overinvest in China.
It encourages hem to practice what Watanabe called a "China plus one" strategy: to eep one production leg in China but the other in a different Asian ountryjust in case political turmoil unflattens China one day.
his China flattener has been wrenching for certain manufacturing orkers around the world but a godsend for all consumers.
Fortune maga ine (October 4, 2004) quoted a study by Morgan Stanley estimating that ince the mid-1990s alone, cheap imports from China have saved U.S. con umers roughly $600 billion and have saved U.S. manufacturers untold bil ions in cheaper parts for their products.
This savings, in turn, Fortune oted, has helped the Federal Reserve to hold down interest rates longer, iving more Americans a chance to buy homes or refinance the ones they ave, and giving businesses more capital to invest in new innovations.
n an effort to better understand how offshoring to China works, I sat own in Beijing with Jack Perkowski of ASIMCO, a pioneer in this form f collaboration.
In 1988 he stepped own as a top investment banker at Paine Webber and went to a leverage uyout firm, but two years later, at age forty-two, decided it was time for a ew challenge.
With some partners, he raised $150 million to buy com anies in China and headed off for the adventure of his life.
Since then HE WORLD IS FLAT e has lost and remade millions of dollars, learned every lesson the hard ay, but survived to become a powerful example of what offshoring to hina is all about and what a powerful collaborative tool it can become.
When I first started back in 1992-1993, everyone thought the hard art was to actually find and gain access to opportunities in China," re alled Perkowski.
As Perkowski put it, the asy part was setting up shop in China.
So when he initially started buy ng majority ownership in Chinese auto parts companies, Perkowski began y importing managers from abroad.
It was too expensive, and perating in China was just too foreign for foreigners.
"We then tried to convert the Old China' managers who typically came along with the plants we ought, but that didn't work either.
The Chinese are very entrepreneurial," said Perkowski, "but back hen, before China joined the WTO, there was no rule of law and no ond or stock market to restrain this entrepreneurialism.
Your only hoices were managers from the state-owned sector, who were very bu eaucratic, or managers from the first wave of private companies, who ere practicing cowboy capitalism.
If our managers are too bureaucratic, you can't get anything donethey ust give excuses about how China is differentand if they are too en repreneurial, you can't sleep at night, because you have no idea what hey are going to do."
ne of his first purchases in China was an interest in a company mak ng rubber parts.
Scratch plan B. eanwhile, Perkowski's partnership was hemorrhaging money erkowski's tuition for learning how to do business in Chinaand he ound himself owning a string of Chinese auto parts factories.
While some of our companies were do ng okay, we were generally in tough shape.
Time for plan C. We essentially concluded that, while we liked China, we wanted o part of 'Old China' and instead wanted to place our bets on 'New hina' managers," said Perkowski.
We were looking for individuals who were experi nced at operating in China and yet were familiar with how the rest of  the world operated and knew where China had to go.
So between 1997 nd 1999, we recruited a whole team of 'New China' managers, typically ainland Chinese who had worked for multinationals, and as these anagers came on board, we began one by one to replace the 'Old hina' managers at our companies."
nce the new generation of Chinese managers, who understood lobal markets and customers and could be united around a shared com any visionand knew Chinawas in place, ASIMCO started making  profit.
The company ells to customers in the United States, and it also has thirty-six sales of ices throughout China servicing automakers in that country too.
rom this base, Perkowski made his next big movetaking the profits rom offshoring back onshore in America.
"In April of 2003, we bought he North American camshaft operations of Federal-Mogul Corporation, n old-line components company that is now in bankruptcy," said erkowski.
"We bought the business first to get access to its customers, HE WORLD IS FLAT hich were primarily the Big Three automakers, plus Caterpillar and ummins.
The acquisition of this business essentially gave us he know-how and technology that we could use to become the camshaft eader in China.
As a result, we now have the best camshaft technology nd a customer base both in China and the U.S." his is a very important point, because the general impression is that ffshoring is a lose-lose proposition for American workerssomething hat was here went over there, and that is the end of the story.
ost companies build offshore factories not simply to obtain cheaper abor for products they want to sell in America or Europe.
Another moti ation is to serve that foreign market without having to worry about trade arriers and to gain a dominant foothold thereparticularly a giant mar et like China's.
ccording to a January 26, 2004, study by the Heritage Foundation, Job reation and the Taxation of Foreign-Source Income, American compa ies that produce at home and abroad, for both the American market nd China's, generate more than 21 percent of U.S. economic output, roduce 56 percent of U.S. exports, and employ three-fifths of all manu- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD acturing employees, about nine million workers.
So if General Motors uilds a factory offshore in Shanghai, it also ends up creating jobs in merica by exporting a lot of goods and services to its own factory in hina and benefiting from lower parts costs in China for its factories n America.
hile much attention is paid to American companies going offshore to hina, little attention is paid to the huge amount of offshore investment oming into America every year, because foreigners want access to merican markets and labor just like we want access to theirs.
On eptember 25, 2003, DaimlerChrysler celebrated the tenth anniversary f its decision to build the first Mercedes-Benz passenger car factory out ide Germany, in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, by announcing a $600 million lant expansion.
"In Tuscaloosa we have impressively shown that we can roduce a new production series with a new workforce in a new factory, nd we have also demonstrated that it is possible to have vehicles suc essfully 'Made by Mercedes' outside of Germany," Professor Jiirgen ubbert, the DaimlerChrysler Board of Management member respon ible for the Mercedes Car Group, announced on the anniversary.
In this way, ASIMCO's American ustomers receive the benefit of a China supply chain and at the same ime have the comfort of dealing with a known, American supplier.
The average wage for a factory worker in China is about 150 a month.
The fact that health insurance in China is so much heaperbecause of lower wages, much more limited health service of erings, and no malpractice suits "certainly makes China an attractive HE WORLD IS FLAT lace to expand and add employees/' explained Perkowski.
And that is what many in the U.S. are missing hen they talk about offshoring.
Since the acquisition, for example, we ave doubled our business with Cummins, and our business with Cater illar has grown significantly.
"We could not have done what we have done in China in 1983 r 1993," said Perkowski.
For example, people always talk about how much the Internet as benefited the U.S.
The point I always make is that China has bene ited even more.
What has held China back in the past was the inability f people outside China to get information about the country, and the in bility of people inside China to get information about the rest of the orld.
Prior to the Internet, the only way to close that information gap as travel.
Now you can stay home and do it with the Internet.
We now just e-mail blue rints over the Internetwe don't even need FedEx."
he advantages for manufacturing in China, for certain industries, re becoming overwhelming, added Perkowski, and cannot be ignored.
ither you get flat or you'll be flattened by China.
"If you are sitting in he U.S. and don't figure out how to get into China," he said, "in ten or ifteen years from now you will not be a global leader."
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD w that China is in the WTO, a lot of traditional, slow, inefficient,  >l and protected sectors of the Chinese economy are being exposed to ome withering global competitionsomething received as warmly in anton, China, as in Canton, Ohio.
Had the Chinese government put TO membership to a popular vote, "it never would have passed," said at Powers, who headed the U.S.-China Business Council office in eijing during the W T O accession.
A key reason why China's leadership ought W T O membership was to use it as a club to force China's bu eaucracy to modernize and take down internal regulatory walls and ockets for arbitrary decision making.
China's leadership "knew that hina had to integrate globally and that many of their existing institu ions would simply not change and reform, and so they used the W T O s leverage against their own bureaucracy.
ver time, adherence to W T O standards will make China's economy ven flatter and more of a flattener globally.
But even if China implements all he WTO reforms, it won't be able to rest.
It will soon be reaching a point here its ambitions for economic growth will require more political re orm.
China will never root out corruption without a free press and active ivil society institutions.
To put it another way, China will never be ruly flat until it gets over that huge speed bump called "political reform."
t seems to be heading in that direction, but it still has a long way to o. I like the way a U.S. diplomat in China put it to me in the spring of 004: "China right now is doing titillation, not privatization.
The government still just gives] the information [about the economy] to  few companies and designated interest groups."
f and when China gets over that political bump in the road, I think t could become not only a bigger platform for offshoring but another ree-market version of the United States.
Think about how many new products, ideas, jobs, and con umers arose from Western Europe's and Japan's efforts to become freemarket democracies after World War II.
If India and China move in that di ection, the world will not only become flatter than ever but also, I am onvinced, more prosperous than ever.
Three United States are better han one, and five would be better than three.
ut even as a free-trader, I am worried about the challenge this will ose to wages and benefits of certain workers in the United States, at least n the short run.
It is too late for protectionism when it comes to China.
Americans and Europeans will ave to develop new business models that will enable them to get the est out of China and cushion themselves against some of the worst.
As usinessWeek, in its dramatic December 6, 2004, cover story on "The hina Price," put it, "Can China dominate everything?
merica will surely continue to benefit from China's expansion."
That aid, unless America can deal with the long-term industrial challenge osed by the China price in so many areas, "it will suffer a loss of eco omic power and influence."
r, to put it another way, if Americans and Europeans want to bene it from the flattening of the world and the interconnecting of all the HE EN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD arkets and knowledge centers, they will all have to run at least as fast as he fastest lionand I suspect that lion will be China, and I suspect that ill be pretty darn fast.
My Wal-Mart hosts ook me over to the 1.2-million-square-foot distribution center, where we limbed up to a viewing perch and watched the show.
On one side of the uilding, scores of white Wal-Mart trailer trucks were dropping off boxes f merchandise from thousands of different suppliers.
Twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, the suppliers' trucks eed the twelve miles of conveyor streams, and the conveyor streams feed nto a huge Wal-Mart river of boxed products.
As the Wal-Mart river flows along, an electric eye reads the bar odes on each box on its way to the other side of the building.
Electric arms from each stream each out and guide the boxes ordered by particular Wal-Mart stores  ff the main river and down its stream, where another conveyor belt weeps them into a waiting Wal-Mart truck, which will rush these par icular products onto the shelves of a particular Wal-Mart store some here in the country.
That signal will go out across the WalMart network to the supplier of that productwhether that supplier's actory is in coastal China or coastal Maine.
That signal will pop up on he supplier's computer screen and prompt him to make another of that tem and ship it via the Wal-Mart supply chain, and the whole cycle will HE WORLD IS FLAT tart anew.
ust one company, Hewlett-Packard, will sell four hundred thousand omputers through the four thousand Wal-Mart stores worldwide in one ay during the Christmas season, which will require HP to adjust its upply chain, to make sure that all of its standards interface with WalMart's, so that these computers flow smoothly into the Wal-Mart river, nto the Wal-Mart streams, into the Wal-Mart stores.
Supply-chaining is both nabled by the flattening of the world and a hugely important flattener tself, because the more these supply chains grow and proliferate, the ore they force the adoption of common standards between companies so that every link of every supply chain can interface with the next), the ore they eliminate points of friction at borders, the more the efficien ies of one company get adopted by the others, and the more they en ourage global collaboration.
o appreciate how important supply-chaining has become as a source f competitive advantage and profit in a flat world, think about this one act: Wal-Mart today is the biggest retail company in the world, and it does ot make a single thing.
efore looking at Wal-Mart in detail, let me make a few general oints about supply chains and why they have become so important.
So global supply chainsthat draw arts and products from every corner of the worldhave become essen ial for both retailers and manufacturers.
The bad ews, as Sheffi suggests, is that making these chains work is much harder han it looks and requires constant innovation and constant adjustment.
Innovation is hap ening much faster, and so products go in and out of fashion much faster, hich makes forecasting demand much more difficult.
here are many ways that companies try to meet these challenges, HE WORLD IS FLAT oted Sheffi.
This is an rea that Wal-Mart pioneered.
Advanced information echnology also gives Wal-Mart "visibility" into where products are at any ime as they move through the supply chain.
Thus, if demand is high in exas and lower than expected in New England, Wal-Mart can redirect he flow midstream in order to ensure that products are routed to Texas, here customers want them.
ara spends heavily on sophisticated information technology, "in luding PDA's with transmission capabilities for all store managers to onitor customer preferences and then send data directly to a central lanning office," according to Longitudes 04, a collaborative study by arvard Business School and UPS.
Immediately after September 11, Zara executives realized that onsumers were in a somber mood, and within just a few weeks [Zara ex cutives] had stocked their stores with new merchandise that was pre ominantly black."
his strategy is known in the business as "postponement," and the idea, xplained Sheffi, whose latest work is The Resilient Enterprise: Over oming Vulnerability for Competitive Advantage, is that as it becomes arder and harder to forecast demand, good companies find ways to post one adding value to their products until the last possible moment.
The bottom line, concluded Sheffi, is hat in a flat world, products are turned from innovations into commodi ies faster than ever, competition is coming from all over the globe and is ore intense than ever, and consumer demand is more volatile and in ormed than ever, with fads moving in and out around the globe like ightning bolts.
consumers, we love supply chains, because they deliver us all sorts f goodsfrom tennis shoes to laptop computersat lower and ower prices and tailored more and more precisely to just what we want.
hat is how Wal-Mart became the world's biggest retailer.
But as workers, e are sometimes ambivalent or hostile to these supply chains, because hey expose us to higher and higher pressures to compete, and force our ompanies to cut costs, and also, at times, cut our wages and benefits.
That s how Wal-Mart became one of the world's most controversial companies.
o retail company has been more efficient at improving its supply chain and thereby flattening the world) than Wal-Mart, and no company epito izes the tension that supply chains evoke between the consumer in us nd the worker in us than does Wal-Mart.
A September 30, 2002, article n Computerworld summed up Wal-Mart's pivotal role: "'Being a supplier o Wal-Mart is a two-edged sword,' says Joseph F. Eckroth Jr., CIO at attel Inc. 'They're a phenomenal channel but a tough customer.
It's a lesson that the El Segundo, Calif-based toy anufacturer and thousands of other suppliers learned as the world's HE WORLD IS FLAT argest retailer, Wal-Mart Stores Inc., built an inventory and supply chain anagement system that changed the face of business.
By investing early nd heavily in cutting-edge technology to identify and track sales on the ndividual item level, the Bentonville, Ark.-based retail giant made its IT nfrastructure a key competitive advantage that has been studied and opied by companies around the world.
'We view Wal-Mart as the best upply chain operator of all time/ says Pete Abell, retail research director t high-tech consultancy AMR Research Inc. in Boston."
n pursuit of the world's most efficient supply chain, Wal-Mart has iled up a list of business offenses over the years that has given the com any several deserved black eyes and that it is belatedly starting to address n a meaningful way.
hen I arrived at the Hilton near Wal-Mart's headquarters, I was tunned to see, like a mirage, a huge Japanese steak house-sushi restau ant right next door.
When I remarked to the desk clerk who was check ng me in that I never expected to get my sushi fix in Bentonville, he told e, "We've got three more Japanese restaurants opening up soon."
ultiple Japanese restaurants in Bentonville?
It has to do with he fact that all around Wal-Mart's offices, vendors have set up their own perations to be close to the mother ship.
The amazing thing about Wal-Mart's headquarters is that t is so, well, Wal-Mart.
When you pass through the lobby, HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD ou see these little cubicles where potential suppliers are pitching their roducts to Wal-Mart buyers.
The ewer natural resources your country or company has, the more you will ig inside yourself for innovations in order to survive.
Wal-Mart became he biggest retailer in the world because it drove a hard bargain with veryone it came in contact with.
avid Glass, the company's C E O from 1988 to 2000, oversaw many f the innovations that made Wal-Mart the biggest and most profitable etailer on the planet.
avid Glass is to supply-chaining what Bill Gates is to word processing.
hen Wal-Mart was just getting started in northern Arkansas in the 960s, explained Glass, it wanted to be a discounter.
The only way Wal-Mart could ee to get an edge, he said, was for it to buy its goods in volume directly rom the manufacturers.
But it wasn't efficient for manufacturers to ship to ultiple Wal-Mart stores spread all over, so Wal-Mart set up a distribution enter to which all the manufacturers could ship their merchandise, and hen Wal-Mart got its own trucks to distribute these goods itself to its tores.
The math worked like this: It cost roughly 3 percent more on aver ge for Wal-Mart to maintain its own distribution center.
But it turned HE WORLD IS FLAT ut, said Glass, that cutting out the wholesalers and buying direct from he manufacturers saved on average 5 percent, so that allowed Wal-Mart o cut costs on average 2 percent and then make it up on volume.
nce it established that basic method of buying directly from manu acturers to get the deepest discounts possible, Wal-Mart focused relent essly on three things.
The second was working n its supply chain from those manufacturers, wherever they were in the orld, to Wal-Mart's distribution centers, to make it as low-cost and frictionless as possible.
The third was constantly improving Wal-Mart's in ormation systems, so it knew exactly what its customers were buying and ould feed that information to all the manufacturers, so the shelves ould always be stocked with the right items at the right time.
The reason we built all our own logistics and systems is because we re in the middle of nowhere," said Jay Allen, Wal-Mart's senior vice resident of corporate affairs.
ow with all the attention we are getting there is an assumption that our ow prices derive from our size or because we're getting stuff from China r being able to dictate to suppliers.
The fact is the low prices are derived rom efficiencies Wal-Mart has invested inthe system and the culture.
In 2004, Wal-Mart purchased roughly $260 billion worth of erchandise and ran it through a supply chain consisting of 108 distribu ion centers around the United States, serving the some three thousand al-Mart stores in America.
n the early years, "we were smallwe were 4 or 5 percent of Sears nd Kmart," said Glass.
or instance, after the manufacturers dropped off their goods at the al-Mart distribution center, Wal-Mart needed to deliver those goods in mall bunches to each of its stores.
It meant that Wal-Mart had trucks go ng all over America.
Walton quickly realized if he connected his drivers y radios and satellites, after they dropped off at a certain Wal-Mart store, hey could go a few miles down the road and pick up goods from a man facturer so they wouldn't come back empty and so Wal-Mart could save he delivery charges from that manufacturer.
n improving its supply chain, Wal-Mart leaves no link untouched.
hile I was touring the Wal-Mart distribution center in Bentonville, I oticed that some boxes were too big to go on the conveyor belts and ere being moved around on pallets by Wal-Mart employees driving spe ial minilift trucks with headphones on.
"You can choose whether you ant your computer voice to be a man or a woman, and you can choose nglish or Spanish," explained Rollin Ford, Wal-Mart's executive vice resident, who oversees the supply chain and was giving me my tour.
few years ago, these pallet drivers would get written instructions for here to pluck a certain pallet and what truck to take it to, but Wal-Mart HE WORLD IS FLAT iscovered that by giving them headphones with a soothing computer oice to instruct them, drivers could use both hands and not have to carry ieces of paper.
It is a million tiny operational innovations like his that differentiate Wal-Mart's supply chain.
ut the real breakthrough, said Glass, was when Wal-Mart realized hat while it had to be a tough bargainer with its manufacturers on price, t the same time the two had to collaborate to create value for each other orizontally if Wal-Mart was going to keep driving down costs.
Wal-Mart as one of the first companies to introduce computers to track store sales nd inventory and was the first to develop a computerized network in or er to share this information with suppliers.
Wal-Mart's theory was that he more information everyone had about what customers were pulling ff the shelves, the more efficient Wal-Mart's buying would be, the uicker its suppliers could adapt to changing market demand.
n 1983, Wal-Mart invested in point-of-sale terminals, which simulta eously rang up sales and tracked inventory deductions for rapid resupply.
Four years later, it installed a large-scale satellite system linking all of he stores to company headquarters, giving Wal-Mart's central computer ystem real-time inventory data and paving the way for a supply chain reased by information and humming down to the last atom of effi iency.
A major supplier can now tap into Wal-Mart's Retail Link private xtranet system to see exactly how its products are selling and when it ight need to up its production.
C. Williams Group Ltd., a Toronto-based retail consulting firm," said n the 2002 Computerworld article on Wal-Mart. "
'While its competi ion guarded sales information, Wal-Mart approached its suppliers as if hey were partners, not adversaries,' " says Granofsky.
By implementing a ollaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment (CPFR) pro ram, Wal-Mart began a just-in-time inventory program that reduced arrying costs for both the retailer and its suppliers.
Thanks HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD o the efficiency of its supply chain alone, Wal-Mart's cost of goods is es imated to be 5 to 10 percent less than that of most of its competitors.
ow Wal-Mart, in its latest supply-chain innovation, has introduced FIDradio frequency identification microchips, attached to each pallet nd merchandise box that comes into Wal-Mart, to replace bar codes, hich have to be scanned individually and can get ripped or soiled.
In June 003, Wal-Mart informed its top one hundred suppliers that by January 1, 005, all pallets and boxes that they ship to Wal-Mart distribution centers ave to come equipped with RFID tags.
(According to the RFID Journal, RFID is a generic term for technologies that use radio waves to automati ally identify people or objects.
RFID will allow Wal-Mart o track any pallet or box at each stage in its supply chain and know exactly hat product from which manufacturer is inside, with what expiration date.
f a grocery item has to be stored at a certain temperature, the RFID tag will ell Wal-Mart when the temperature is too high or too low.
Because each of hese tags costs around 200, Wal-Mart is reserving them now for big boxes nd pallets, not individual items.
When you have RFID," said Rollin Ford, the Wal-Mart logistics vice resident, "you have more insights."
You can tell even faster which stores ell more of which shampoo on Fridays and which ones on Sundays, and hether Hispanics prefer to shop more on Saturday nights rather than ondays in the stores in their neighborhoods.
Procter & Gamble spokesperson Jeannie Tharrington talked to alon.com (September 20, 2004) about Wal-Mart's move to RFID: "We ee this as beneficial to the entire supply chain.
uring hurricanes, Wal-Mart officials told me, Wal-Mart knows that eople eat more things like Pop-Tartseasy-to-store, nonperishable temsand that their stores also sell a lot of kids' games that don't require lectricity and can substitute for TV.
So the minute Wal-Mart's eteorologists tell headquarters a hurricane is bearing down on Florida, ts supply chain automatically adjusts to a hurricane mix in the Florida toresmore beer early, more Pop-Tarts later.
So Wal-Mart of ered them payroll check cashing, money orders, money transfers, and ven bill payment services for standard items like electricity bills all for ery small fees.
Wal-Mart had an internal capability to do that for its own mployees and simply turned it into an external business.
OO UCH F  GOOD HING nfortunately for Wal-Mart, the same factors that drove its instinct for onstant innovation its isolation from the world, its need to dig inside it elf, and its need to connect remote locations to a global supply chain  HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD lso got it in trouble.
am Walton bred not only a kind of ruthless quest for efficiency in mproving Wal-Mart's supply chain but also a degree of ruthlessness pe iod.
I am talking about everything from Wal-Mart's recently exposed ractice of locking overnight workers into its stores, to its allowing WalMart's maintenance contractors to use illegal immigrants as janitors, to ts role as defendant in the largest civil-rights class-action lawsuit in his ory, to its refusal to stock certain magazines like Playboyon its helves, even in small towns where Wal-Mart is the only major store.
his is all aside from the fact that some of Wal-Mart's biggest competitors omplain that they have had to cut health-care benefits and create a ower wage tier to compete with Wal-Mart, which pays less and covers ess than most big companies (more on this later).
One can only hope hat all the bad publicity Wal-Mart has received in the last few years will orce it to understand that there is a fine line between a hyperefficient lobal supply chain that is helping people save money and improve their ives and one that has pursued cost cutting and profit margins to such a egree that whatever social benefits it is offering with one hand, it is tak ng away with the other.
al-Mart is the China of companies.
If all of Wal-Mart's suppliers were being queezed dry by Wal-Mart, Wal-Mart would have no suppliers.
So obvi usly many of them are thriving as Wal-Mart's partners.
But some no doubt ave translated Wal-Mart's incessant price pressure into lower wages and enefits for their employees or watched as their business moved to China, hence Wal-Mart's supply chain pulled in $18 billion worth of goods in 004 from five thousand Chinese suppliers.
"If Wal-Mart were an indi idual economy, it would rank as China's eighth-biggest trading partner, HE WORLD IS FLAT head of Russia, Australia and Canada," Xu Jun, the spokesman for WalMart China, told the China Business Weekly (November 29, 2004).
he successor generation to Sam Walton's leadership seems to rec gnize that it has both an image and a reality to fix.
How far Wal-Mart ill adjust remains to be seen.
But when I asked Wal-Mart's CEO, H. Lee cott Jr., directly about all these issues, he did not duck.
ne trend that Wal-Mart insists it is not responsible for is the off horing of manufacturing.
"We are much better off if we can buy mer handise made in the United States," said Glass.
We ould pay more to buy it here because the manufacturing facilities in hose towns [would create jobs for] all those people who shopped in our tores.
Sanyo had a plant here [in Arkansas] making television sets for ears, and Sears cut them off, so they decided they were closing the plant nd going to move part to Mexico and part to Asia.
We decided we would buy television sets from Sanyo if they would keep the plant in Arkansas], and they didn't want to do it.
hey wanted to move it, and [the governor] even talked to the [Japanese wning] family to try to persuade them to stay.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD he best way to get a taste of Wal-Mart's power as a global flattener is o visit Japan.
Commodore Matthew Calbraith Perry opened a largely losed Japanese society to the Western world on July 8,1853, when he ar ived in Edo (Tokyo) Bay with four big black steamships bristling with uns.
According to the Naval Historical Center Web site, the Japanese, ot knowing that steamships even existed, were shocked by the sight of hem and thought they were "giant dragons puffing smoke."
Commodore erry returned a year later, and on March 31,1854, concluded the Treaty f Kanagawa with the Japanese authorities, gaining U.S. vessels access to he ports of Shimoda and Hakodate and opening a U.S. consulate in himoda.
This treaty led to an explosion of trade between Japan and the nited States, helped open Japan to the Western world generally, and is idely credited with triggering the modernization of the Japanese state, as he Japanese realized how far behind they were and rushed to catch up.
Japan could make those Sonys like nobody else, but hen it came to selling them at a discount, well, that was another matter.
o almost exactly 150 years after Commodore Perry signed that reaty, another lesser-known treaty was signed, actually a business part ership.
Call it the Seiyu-Wal-Mart Treaty of 2003.
Unlike Commodore erry, Wal-Mart did not have to muscle its way into Japan with warships.
ts reputation preceded it, which is why it was invited in by Seiyu, a strug ling Japanese retail chain desperate to adapt the Wal-Mart formula in apan, a country notorious for resisting big-box discount stores.
As I trav led on the bullet train from Tokyo to Numazu, site of the first Seiyu tore that was using the Wal-Mart methods, the New York Times transla or pointed out that this store was located about one hundred miles from himoda and that first U.S. consulate.
Commodore Perry probably ould have loved shopping in the new Seiyu store, where all the music iped in consists of Western tunes designed to lull shoppers into filling heir carts, and where you can buy a man's suitmade in Chinafor 65 and a white shirt to go with it for $5.
Around Wal-Mart that's called HE WORLD IS FLAT DLPEvery Day Low Pricesand this was one of the first phrases al-Mart folks learned to say in Japanese.
al-Mart's flattening effects are fully on display in the Seiyu store in umazu  not just the everyday low prices, but the wide aisles, the big allets of household goods, the huge signs displaying the lowest prices in ach category, and the Wal-Mart supply-chain computer system so that tore managers can quickly adjust stock.
asked Seiyu's C E O , Masao Kiuchi, why he had turned to Wal-Mart.
The first time I knew about Wal-Mart was about fifteen years ago," ex lained Kiuchi.
"I went to Dallas to see the Wal-Mart stores, and I hought this was a very rational method.
The sec nd, he said, was that the Japanese thought a discount store meant that ou sold cheap products at cheap prices.
What he realized from shopping t Wal-Mart, and seeing everything from plasma TVs to top-brand pet roducts, was that Wal-Mart sold quality products at low prices.
At the store in Dallas, I took pictures, and I brought those pictures to y colleagues in Seiyu and said, Took, we have to see what Wal-Mart is oing on the other side of the planet.'
Eventually, Kiuchi approached Wal-Mart, and they igned a partnership on December 31, 2003.
Wal-Mart bought a piece of eiyu; in return, Wal-Mart agreed to teach Seiyu its unique form of col aboration: global supply-chaining to bring consumers the best goods at he lowest prices.
here was one big thing, though, that Seiyu had to teach Wal-Mart, iuchi told me: how to sell raw fish.
Japanese discounters and depart ent stores all have grocery sections, and they all carry fish for very iscriminating Japanese consumers.
Seiyu will discount fish several imes during each day, as the freshness declines.
Wal-Mart doesn't understand raw fish," said Kiuchi.
ive Wal-Mart time.
I expect that in the not-too-distant future we will ee Wal-Mart sushi.
nce again, it was one of my Indian tutors, Nandan Nilekani, the nfosys CEO, who tipped me off to this.
A few months later I went to China, and hile there I was afflicted with jet lag one night and was watching CNN nternational to pass the wee hours of the morning.
UPS, I learned, was not just delivering packages anymore; it was ynchronizing global supply chains for companies large and small.
onsider this: If you own a Toshiba laptop computer that is under war anty and it breaks and you call Toshiba to have it repaired, Toshiba will tell ou to drop it off at a UPS store and have it shipped to Toshiba, and it will et repaired and then be shipped back to you.
But here's what they don't tell ou: UPS doesn't just pick up and deliver your Toshiba laptop.
I went to tour that hub xpecting to see only packages moving around, and instead I found myself ressed in a blue smock, in a special clean room, watching UPS employees eplacing motherboards in broken Toshiba laptops.
Toshiba had developed n image problem several years ago, with some customers concluding that ts repair process for broken machines took too long.
So Toshiba came to PS and asked it to design a better system.
It is now possible to send your Toshiba laptop in ne day, get it repaired the next, and have it back the third day.
The UPS re airmen and -women are all certified by Toshiba, and its customer com laints have gone down dramatically.
UPS comes inside a lot f companies now and takes over their branded vehicles to assure on-time elivery, which in the case of Papa John's includes getting the pizza dough rom bakeries to outlets at exactly the right times each day.
Order some tropical fish from Segrest Farms in Florida to e delivered to your door in Canada by UPS?
But not every company, indeed very few companies, can fford to develop and support a complex global supply chain of the scale nd scope that Wal-Mart has developed.
Insourcing came about because once the world went flat, the mall could act bigsmall companies could suddenly see around the orld.
Many big companies didn't want to manage this complexity, which hey felt was not part of their core competency.
Nike would rather spend ts cash and energy designing better tennis shoes, not supply chains.
There are companies today (many of them don't want their ames mentioned) that never touch their own products anymore.
(now "The UPS Store" in the United States) so hat it could offer individuals and small businesses the power of its global upply-chain services.
orking with the U.S. Customs Service, UPS designed a software rogram that allows customs to say to UPS, "I want to see any package oving through your Worldport hub that was sent from Cali, Colombia, o Miami by someone named Carlos."
Or, "I want to see any package ent from Germany to the United States by someone named Osama."
These efficiencies of ime and scale save UPS's clients money, enabling them to recycle their apital and fund more innovation.
low & Hearth is a large national catalog and Internet retailer spe ializing in "Products for Country Living."
onsider the collaboration today among eBay sellers, UPS, PayPal, nd eBay buyers.
I e-mail you a PayPal invoice, which has your name and mailing ddress on it.
At the ame time, UPS, through its computer system, creates a tracking number hat corresponds to that label, which automatically gets e-mailed to outhe person who bought my golf clubso you can track the pack ge by yourself, online, on a regular basis and know exactly when it will each you.
Said Kurt Kuehn, UPS's senior vice president or sales and marketing, "The Texas machine parts guy is worried that the ustomer in Malaysia is a credit risk.
ore than sixty companies have moved operations closer to the UPS ub in Louisville since 1997, so they can make things and ship them traight from the hub, without having to warehouse them.
But after UPS got under ord's hood, "UPS engineers... redesigned Ford's entire North Ameri an delivery network, streamlining everything from the route cars take rom the factory to how they're processed at regional sorting hubs" ncluding pasting bar codes on the windshields of the four million cars oming out of Ford's U.S. plants so they could be tracked just like pack ges.
BusinessWeek reported: "That saves ord millions in working capital each year and makes it easy for its 6,500 ealers to track down the models most in demand .
" PS maintains a think tank, the Operations Research Division, in HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD imonium, Maryland, which works on supply-chain algorithms.
To further grease its supply chains, UPS is the argest private user of wireless technology in the world, as its drivers alone ake over one million phone calls a day in the process of picking up and elivering packages through its eighty-eight thousand package cars, vans, ractors, and motorcycles.
or example, notes Eskew, UPS was doing business with a small iotech company in Canada that sold blood adhesives, a highly perish ble alternative to stitches.
A maker of bridal eadpieces and veils in Montreal wanted to improve its flow of business ith the United States.
ndeed, as consumers have become more empowered to pull their wn products via the Internet and customize them for themselves, UPS as found itself in the interesting position of being not only the company ctually taking the orders but also, as the delivery service, the one hand ng the goods to the buyer at the front door.
As a result, companies said, Let's try to push as many differentiating things to the end of the supply hain, rather than the beginning."
And because UPS was the last link in he supply chain before these goods were loaded onto planes, trains, and rucks, it took over many of these functions, creating a whole new busi ess called End of Runway Services.
The day I visited Louisville, two oung UPS women were putting together Nikon cameras, with special emory cards and leather cases, which some store had offered as a week nd special.
By taking over this function, UPS gives companies more options to ustomize products at the last minute.
PS has also taken full advantage of the Netscape and work flow latteners.
Then, hrough the 1990s, as more and more UPS customers became empow red and comfortable with the Internet, and as its own tracking and trac ng system improved with advances in wireless technology, UPS invited ts customers to track packages themselves over the Internet, at a cost to PS of 50 to 100 a query.
In many cases today, UPS and its mployees are so deep inside their clients' infrastructure that it is almost im ossible to determine where one stops and the other starts.
HE WORLD IS FLAT  l A T T I M R  I ) N-FORMING oogle, Yahoo!, MSN Web Search y friend and I met a guy at a restaurant.
Testimonial from Google user  am completely delighted with the translation service.
Thank you Google.
Testimonial from Google user  just want to thank Google for teaching me how to find love.
We got married last weekend in Mexico], and I am positive without Google's services, I never would have ound my brother, my husband, or the surprisingly lucrative nature of the male tripping industry in Mexico!!
Thank you, Google!
Testimonial from Google user HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD  ogle headquarters in Mountain View, California, has a certain pcot Center feel to itso many fun space-age toys to play with, so ittle time.
In one corner is a spinning globe that emits light beams based n the volume of people searching on Google.
As you would expect, most f the shafts of light are shooting up from North America, Europe, Korea, apan, and coastal China.
The Middle East and Africa remain pretty dark.
ne, of course, was "sex," a perennial favorite of Googlers.
The weirdest one, though, is the Google recipe book, where eople just open their refrigerators, see what ingredients are inside, type hree of them into Google, and see what recipes come up!
ortunately, no single word or subject accounts for more than 1 or 2 ercent of all Google searches at any given time, so no one should get oo worried about the fate of humanity on the basis of Google's top earch items on any particular day.
Indeed, it is the remarkable diversity f searches going on via Google, in so many different tongues, that makes he Google search engine (and search engines in general) such huge latteners.
aid Russian-born Google cofounder Sergey Brin, "If someone has roadband, dial-up, or access to an Internet caf, whether a kid in ambodia, the university professor, or me who runs this search engine, ll have the same basic access to overall research information that any ne has.
When Google came along, he added, uddenly that kid had "universal access" to the information in libraries ll over the world.
hat is certainly Google's goalto make easily available all the world's nowledge in every language.
And Google hopes that in time, with a almPilot or a cell phone, everyone everywhere will be able to carry round access to all the world's knowledge in their pockets.
"Everything" nd "everyone" are key words that you hear around Google all the time.
ndeed, the official Google history carried on its home page notes that the ame "Google" is a play on the word " googol,' which is the number rep esented by the numeral 1 followed by 100 zeros.
Google's use of the term eflects the company's mission to organize the immense, seemingly infi ite amount of information available on the Web," just for you.
We do discriminate only to the degree that if you can't use a com uter or don't have access to one, you can't use Google, but other than hat, if you can type, you can use Google," said Google C E O Eric chmidt.
Let's imagine a group with a Google iPod ne day and you can tell it to search by voicethat would take care of eople who can't use a computerand then [Google access] just be omes about the rate at which we can get cheap devices into people's ands."
In-forming is the individual's personal analog to uploading, out ourcing, insourcing, supply-chaining, and offshoring.
Google's phenomenal global popularity, which has spurred ahoo!
and Microsoft (through its MSN Search) also to make power earching and in-forming prominent features of their Web sites, shows ow hungry people are for this form of collaboration.
Google is now pro essing roughly one billion searches per day, up from 150 million just hree years ago.
he easier and more accurate searching becomes, added Larry Page, oogle's other cofounder, the more global Google's user base becomes, nd the more powerful a flattener it becomes.
Moreover, he added, "as people are searching for more ob cure things, people are publishing more obscure things," which drives he flattening effect of in-forming even more.
All the major search en ines have also recently added the capability for users to search not only he Web for information but also their own computer's hard drive for ords or data or e-mail they know is in there somewhere but have for otten where.
When you can search your own memory more efficiently, hat is really in-forming.
In late 2004, Google announced plans to scan he entire contents of both the University of Michigan and Stanford niversity libraries, making tens of thousands of books available and earchable online.
n the earliest days of search engines, people were amazed and de ighted to stumble across the information they sought; eureka moments ere unexpected surprises, said Yahoo !
oogle's founders understood that by the late 1990s hundreds of housands of Web pages were being added to the Internet each day, and hat existing search engines, which tended to search for keywords, could ot keep pace.
Brin and Page, who met as Stanford University graduate tudents in computer science in 1995, developed a mathematical formula hat ranked a Web page by how many other Web pages were linked to it, n the assumption that the more people linked to a certain page, the ore important the page.
The key breakthrough that enabled Google o become first among search engines was its ability to combine its ageRank technology with an analysis of page content, which determines hich pages are most relevant to the specific search being conducted.
ven though Google entered the market after other major search players, ts answers were seen by people as more accurate and relevant to what hey were looking for.
(Google now mploys scores of mathematicians working on its search algorithms, in an ffort to always keep them one step more relevant than the competition.)
We have people who earch Google for heart-attack symptoms and then call nine-one-one."
"I just Googled their phone numbers, and heir home addresses came up."
ll that Natalie was doing was in-forming, using Google in a way hat I had no idea was possible.
Thanks to Google, all that digitized in ormation that we were creating with our PCs was suddenly searchable.
What is staggering is how much informa ion there is out there information that was never searchable, but will e in the future, thanks to ever smarter search engines, which will be ble to sift through larger and larger mountains of different kinds of atafrom pictures to videos to home listings to traffic reports to high chool newspapers and health cures.
"People have thought about text as he one source of information," said Kai-Fu Lee, who originally set up he Microsoft research center in Beijing and now directs Google's oper tions in China.
"But there are images, videos, books, even from ages go, that now will be searchable.
Basically everything we see, hear, ouch, read, and write is informationand right now Internet search overs only a tiny, tiny fraction of everything that could be browsed and earched and navigated."
hile we were traveling in China, Natalie also had her iPod with er, which empowered her to in-form herself in another waywith en ertainment instead of knowledge.
She had become her own music edi or and loaded all her favorite songs onto her iPod and was carrying them ll over China.
TiVo allows iewers to digitally record their favorite programs and skip the ads, except hose they want to see.
ut just as Google can track what you are searching for, so too can iVo, which knows which shows and which ads you are freezing, storing, nd rewinding on your own TV.
The companies you want to bet on are those that, like oogle or Yahoo!
ompanies like Google, Yahoo!, Amazon.com, and TiVo have learned o thrive not by pushing products and services on their customers so much s by building collaborative systems that enable customers to pull on their wn, and then responding with lightning quickness to what they pull.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Search is so highly personal that searching is empowering for hu ans like nothing else," said Google C E O Eric Schmidt.
f course what made Google not just a search engine but a hugely rofitable business was its founders' realization that they could build a argeted advertising model that would show you ads that are relevant to ou when you searched for a specific topic and then could charge ad ertisers for the number of times Google users clicked on their ads.
hereas CBS broadcasts a movie and has only a rough idea who is atching it or the advertisements, Google knows exactly what you are nterested in after all, you are searching for itand can link you up ith advertisers directly or indirectly connected to your searches.
In ate 2004, Google began a service whereby if you are walking around ethesda, Maryland, and are in the mood for sushi, you just send oogle an SMS message on your cell phone that says "Sushi 20817"  he Bethesda zip codeand it will send you back a text message of hoices.
People can now search out fellow ollaborators on any subject, project, or themeparticularly through ortals like Yahoo!
Groups.
Yahoo!
The Internet is growing in the self-services area, and Yahoo!
Groups xemplifies this trend," said Jerry Yang.
"It provides a forum, a platform,  set of tools for people to have private, semiprivate, or public gatherings n the Internet regardless of geography or time.
Groups can serve as support groups for omplete strangers who are galvanized by a common issue (coping with are diseases, first-time parents, spouses of active-duty personnel) or who eek others who share similar interests (hobbies as esoteric as dogsledding, blackjack, and indoor tanning have large memberships).
But Google, Yahoo!, and MSN Search re getting rid of those hard floors, very quickly, so anyone can drill into nyone else's past with a few thumb clicks on a PalmPilot.
And you may be shocked to discover all the things that eople, or companies, can find out about you from your salary to here you live to your favorite books just by Googling you.
veryone can now be Googledbut everyone now can also Google.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD oogle also equalizes access to information it has no class boundaries, ew education boundaries, few linguistic boundaries, and virtually no oney boundaries.
If you can get on Google, you have access to the orld's greatest research tool, without having to go to MIT.
"If I can perate Google, I can find anything," said Alan Cohen, then vice president f Airespace, which sells wireless technology.
"Google is like God.
Any questions in the orld, you ask Google."
It's the first palmtop that can onnect to the Internet and other gadgets in four wireless ways.
For distances up to 30 feet, it as built-in Bluetooth circuitry .
For distances up to 150 feet, it has a Wi-Fi ntenna.
Ever since we took a cab together the ther day in downtown Tokyo and Jim whipped out his wireless-enabled HE WORLD IS FLAT aptop in the backseat and e-mailed me something through Yahoo!, I ave been exclaiming at the amazing degree of wireless penetration and onnectivity in japan.
Save for a few remote islands and mountain vil ages, if you have a wireless card in your computer, or any Japanese cell hone, you can get online anywherefrom deep inside the subway sta ions to the bullet trains speeding through the countryside.
Jim knows I m slightly obsessed with the fact that Japan, not to mention most of the est of the world, has so much better wireless connectivity than America.
See, Tom, I am online right now," he says, as the Japanese countryside hizzes by.
We are on a bullet train going 240 km per hourthat's 50 mphand my colleague is answering e-mail from Kazakhstan, and I an't drive from my home in suburban Washington to downtown D.C. ithout my cell phone service being interrupted at least twice.
The day be ore, I was in Tokyo waiting for an appointment with Jim's colleague Todd aun, and he was preoccupied with his Japanese cell phone, which easily onnects to the Internet from anywhere.
"For $3 a month I sub cribe to this [Japanese] site that tells me each morning how high the aves are at the beaches near my house.
The more I thought about this, the more I wanted to run for pres dent on a one-issue ticket: "I promise, if elected, that within four years merica will have as good cell phone coverage as Ghana, and in eight ears as good as Japanprovided that the Japanese sign a standstill greement and won't innovate for eight years so we can catch up."
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD  know that America will catch up sooner or later with the rest of the orld in wireless technology.
They are taking all he forms of collaboration highlighted in this sectionoutsourcing, off horing, uploading, supply-chaining, insourcing, and in-formingand aking it possible to do each and every one of them in a way that is "dig tal, mobile, virtual, and personal," as former HP C E O Carly Fiorina put t in her speeches, thereby enhancing each one and making the world latter by the day.
y "digital," Fiorina means that thanks to the PC-WindowsNetscape-work flow revolutions, all analog content and processes  verything from photography to entertainment to communication to ord processing to architectural design to the management of my home awn sprinkler systemare being digitized and therefore can be shaped, anipulated, and transmitted over computers, the Internet, satellites, or iber-optic cable.
Bill Brody, the president of Johns Hopkins, told me this story in he summer of 2004: "I am sitting in a medical meeting in Vail and the doctor] giving a lecture quotes a study from Johns Hopkins University.
So I had a PDA [per onal digital assistant], and I immediately went online [wirelessly] and got nto the Johns Hopkins portal and into Medline and did a search right hile I was sitting there.
As a result of it, year after year we have een able to digitize, shape, crunch, and transmit more words, music, ata, and entertainment than ever before.
or instance, for several decades now chipmakers have been steadily shrinking the transistors on chips so that electrons have less distance to ravel, thereby speeding up the processing of data," noted BusinessWeek June 20, 2005).
In 1971, the Intel 4004 microprocessor produced .06 MIPS, or 0,000 instructions per second.
Today's Intel Pentium Processor Extreme dition (with two cores) approaches a theoretical maximum of over 20 bil ion instructions per second.
In 1971, the Intel 4004 microprocessor con- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD ained 2,300 transistors.
Intel's highest-end Itanium processor for 2006 acks 1.7 billion transistors.
These cores can share the load, so that neither one over eats or uses too much energy.
Today I can do that lmost instantaneously on a USB 2.0 disk drive and the latest Intel proces or.
At the same time, the amount of stuff you can now store to input and utput "is off the charts, thanks to the steady advances in storage devices," aid Craig Mundie, Microsoft's chief technology officer.
n The Lexus and the Olive Tree, I wrote about a 1999 Qwest com ercial showing a businessman, tired and dusty, checking in to a road ide motel in the middle of nowhere.
I wrote about that back then as an example of what happens hen you get connected to the Internet.
Today it is an example of how uch you can now get disconnected from the Internet, because in the ext few years, as storage continues to advance and become more and ore miniaturized, you will be able to buy enough storage to carry many f those movies around in your pocket.
File sharing, the peer-to-peer model, allows computer sers to share songs, video, and other kinds of files with one another nline.
Peer-to-peer networks emerged in the public eye with Napster, hich enabled any two of us to share songs stored on each other's omputers.
"At its peak," according to Howstuffworks.com, "Napster was erhaps the most popular Web site ever created.
The orig nal Napster became so popular so quickly because it offered a unique roductfree music that you could obtain nearly effortlessly from a igantic database."
That database was actually a file-sharing architec ure by which Napster facilitated a connection between my computer nd yours so that we could swap music files.
The original Napster is ead, but file-sharing technology is still around and is getting more so histicated every day, greatly enhancing collaboration.
Some 330 mil ion tracks were purchased online in 2004 from online stores such as pple's iTunes, the Associated Press reported on June 22, 2005, but round 5 billion were downloaded for free by people tapping open file- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD haring networks using freely downloadable file-sharing programs such s eDonkey, BitTorrent, and Kazaa.
he third steroid involves breakthroughs in making phone calls over he Internet.
Collaborating with all this digitized data is going to be ade even easier and cheaper thanks to another burgeoning steroid  oice over Internet protocol service, known as VoIP.
VoIP allows you to ake phone calls over the Internet by turning voices into data packets hat are sent down Internet networks and converted back into voices on he other end.
VoIP allows anyone who subscribes to the service through is phone company or private operator to receive unlimited local and ong-distance phone calls, via the Internet, over his personal computer, aptop, or PDAwith just a small microphone attachment.
onsider this item from the November 1, 2004, BusinessWeek, about he pioneering VoIP company Skype: "Eriksen Translations Inc. is a small usiness with a big footprint.
The Brooklyn (N.Y.) company relies on ,000 freelancers scattered around the world to help translate business ocuments in 75 languages for U.S. clients.
So when business development manager Claudia aitman heard about a new company called Skype Technologies that of ers free voice calls over the Internet to other Skype users anywhere in the orld, she jumped.
Six months after signing up, Eriksen's phone costs al eady have fallen 10 percent.
Even better, its employees and freelancers onfer more often, allowing them to work faster and more efficiently.
It includes videocon erencing capability, a smoother, clearer interface, and a handset system o you can make Internet-based phone calls without being tied to a mi rophone attached to your computer.
As onsumers get more VoIP choices, the competition will be such that elecom companies won't be able to charge for time and distance much onger.
What phone companies will compete ver, and charge for, will be the add-ons.
The old voice platform did not end itself well to innovation.
But when you put voice on an Internet latform, all sorts of innovative options for collaboration become possi le.
Companies will com ete over SoIP (services over the Internet protocol): who can offer you he best videoconferencing while you are talking over your computer, DA, or laptop; who can enable you to talk to someone while easily nviting a third or fourth person into the conversation; who can enable ou to talk and swap document files and send text messages at the same ime, so you can actually speak and work on a document together while alking.
The voice will e free; it's what you enable customers to do around it that will differen iate companies."
Just ouble-click Hang Zhou in Beijing or Vladimir Tolstoy in Moscow or rnst & Young in New York.
Take your choice for accounting: Tianan en Square, Red Square, or Union Square.
he fourth steroid is videoconferencing, which is going to a whole ew level.
HP and the film company DreamWorks SKG collaborated on HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD he design of a videoconferencing suitewith DreamWorks bringing its ovie and sound expertise and HP contributing its computing and ompression technologythat is breathtaking.
Each party to the videoconference sits at a long table facing a wall of flat-panel T V screens and ameras pointed at them.
Because DreamWorks is doing film and an mation work all over the world, it felt that it had to have a videoconfer ncing solution where its creative people could really communicate all heir thoughts, facial expressions, feelings, ire, enthusiasm, and raised eye rows.
HP's chief strategy and technology officer, Shane Robison, told me hat HP plans to have these videoconferencing suites for sale by 2005 at a ost of roughly $250,000 each.
This level of videoconferencing, nce it proliferates, will make remote development, outsourcing, and off horing that much easier and more efficient.
fifth steroid involves recent advances in computer graphics  riven in part by the advances in computer games.
These are greatly en ancing video collaboration and computing generally by offering so uch sharper images and so many more ways to illustrate and manipu ate those images on a screen.
"[These promise] to ring highly visual, interactive interfaces to all sorts of applications in ealth care, education, science and business."
Video games are particularly important in this regard, because n addition to their very realistic visual images and great sound, they are lso highly interactive and increasingly collaborative, and thus a good aunch pad for thinking about how people should best interact with all inds of computer applications as well as with each other in the future."
By the early twenty-first century, people egan to develop that same expectation and with it the desire for data ommunication the ability to access the Internet, e-mail, or any busi ess files anytime, anywhere, using a cell phone, PalmPilot, or some ther personal device.
(And now a third element is entering the picture, reating more demand for wireless technology and enhancing the flat ening of the earth: machines talking to machines wirelessly, such as al-Mart's RFID chips, the little wireless devices that automatically ransmit information to suppliers' computers, allowing them to track nventory.)
Then, thanks to the PC and the nternet, e-mail, the laptop, the browser, and the client server, I could ac ess from my own screen all sorts of data and information being stored on he network.
We are rapidly mov ng into the age of the "mobile me," said Padmasree Warrior, the chief echnology officer of Motorola.
ight now consumers are caught in a maze of wireless technology of erings and standards that are still not totally interoperable.
As we all now, some wireless technology works in one neighborhood, state, or ountry and not in another.
got a taste of what is coming by spending a morning at the Tokyo head uarters of NTT DoCoMo, the Japanese cellular giant that is at the cutting dge of this process and far ahead of America in offering total interoper bility inside Japan.
DoCoMo is an abbreviation for Do Communications ver the Mobile Network; it also means "anywhere" in Japanese.
My ay at DoCoMo's headquarters started with a tour conducted by a robot, hich bowed in perfect Japanese fashion and then gave me a spin round DoCoMo's showroom, which now features handheld video cell hones so you can see the person you are speaking with.
Young people are using our mobile phones today as two-way video hones," explained Tamon Mitsuishi, senior VP of the Ubiquitous Busi ess Department at DoCoMo.
"So this is a mobile phone, and video camera, but it has lso evolved to the extent that it has functions similar to a PC," he added.
Now that we have seen the spread of the Internet around the orld," answered Mitsuishi, "what we believe we have to offer is the ext step.
Internet communication until today has been mostly between ndividuals e-mail and other information.
here is plenty to worry about in this future, from kids being lured by  H E T E N F O R C E S THAT F L A T T E N E D T H E W O R L D nline sexual predators through their cell phones, to employees spending oo much time playing mindless phone games, to people using their phone ameras for all sorts of illicit activities.
Some Japanese were going into ookstores, pulling down cookbooks, and taking pictures of the recipes and hen walking out.
Fortunately, camera phones are now being enabled to ake a noise when they shoot a picture, so that a store owner, or the per on standing next to you in the locker room, will know if he is on Candid amera.
Because your Internet-enabled camera phone is not just a cam ra; it is also a copy machine, with worldwide distribution potential.
oCoMo is now working with other Japanese companies on an rrangement by which you may be walking down the street and see a oster of a concert by Madonna in Tokyo.
Another poster ight be for a new Madonna CD.
No onder my New York Times colleague in Japan, Todd Zaun, who is mar ied to a Japanese woman, remarked to me that there is so much infor ation the Japanese can now access from their Internet-enabled wireless hones that "when I am with my Japanese relatives and someone has a uestion, the first thing they do is reach for the phone."
These steroids should ake uploading that much more open, because they will enable more ndividuals to collaborate with one another in more ways and from more laces than ever before.
They will enhance outsourcing, because they ill make it so much easier for a single department of any company to ollaborate with another company.
And most obviously, they will enhance in-forming he ability to manage your own knowledge supply chain.
ir John Rose, the chief executive of Rolls-Royce, gave me a wonder ul example of how wireless and other steroids are enhancing RollsRoyce's ability to do work flow and other new forms of collaboration with ts customers.
Let's say you are British Airways and you are flying a oeing 777 across the Atlantic.
Rolls-Royce is on the case.
That olls-Royce engine is connected by transponder to a satellite and is eaming data about its condition and performance, at all times, down nto a computer in Rolls-Royce's operations room.
Thanks to the artificial intel igence in the Rolls-Royce computer, based on complex algorithms, it an track anomalies in its engines while they are in operation.
That rtificial intelligence system knows that this engine was probably hit y lightning, and it immediately feeds out a report to a Rolls-Royce ngineer.
"Under ormal circumstances, after an engine gets hit by lightning you would ave to land the plane, call in an engineer, do a visual inspection, and ake a decision about how much damage might have been done and hether the plane has to be delayed in order to do a repair.
I had made plans to fly from altimore to Hartford on Southwest Airlines to visit my daughter Orly, ho was going to school in New Haven, Connecticut.
Being a techsawy guy, I didn't bother with a paper ticket but ordered an e-ticket hrough American Express.
If you want to sit in a window or aisle seat and be able o store your bags, you want to be an A on Southwest Airlines.
Or, to look at it another ay, you, the individual, became an employee of Southwest Airlines.
r, to look at it still another way: If you happen to value your own time taying up past midnight the night before a flight to do your own tick ting, you, the individual, are paying Southwest Airlines to be their mployee!
H E W O R L D IS F L A T  e television commercial is from Konica Minolta Business Tech ologies for a new multipurpose device it sells called bizhub, a iece of office machinery that allows you to do black-and-white or color rinting, copy a document, fax it, scan it, scan it to e-mail, or Internet-fax tall from the same machine.
ed: (At the bizhub) I'm e-mailing it now.
om: You're e-mailing from the copy machine?
ed: No, I'm e-mailing from bizhub.
ed: Right after I scan this.
om: You're scanning at an e-mail machine?
Finally, just when all of this flattening was happening,  whole new group of people, several billion, in fact, walked out onto the laying field from China, India, and the former Soviet Empire.
For instance, at some point around 2003, Southwest Airlines real zed that there were enough PCs around, enough bandwidth, enough omputer storage, enough Internet-comfortable customers, and enough oftware know-how for Southwest to create a work flow system that em owered its customers to download and print out their own boarding asses at home, as easily as downloading a piece of e-mail.
And somewhere around the same time, the work flow software and ardware converged in a way that enabled Konica Minolta to offer scan ing, e-mailing, printing, faxing, and copying all from the same machine.
s Stanford University economist Paul Romer pointed out, economists ave known for a long time that "there are goods that are complemen arywhereby good A is a lot more valuable if you also have good B.
t is my contention that the fall of the Berlin Wall, the rise of the PC, etscape, work flow, outsourcing, offshoring, uploading, insourcing, upply-chaining, in-forming, and the steroids reinforced one another, ike complementary goods.
his platform enables individuals, groups, companies, and universities any here in the world to collaboratefor the purposes of innovation, produc ion, education, research, entertainment, and, alas, war-makinglike no reative platform ever before.
Wealth and ower will increasingly accrue to those countries, companies, individuals, niversities, and groups who get three basic things right: the infrastructure o connect with this flat-world platform, the education to get more of their eople innovating on, working off of, and tapping into this platform, and, inally, the governance to get the best out of this platform and cushion its orst side effects.
fter this book came out, Kevin Kelly, one of the founders of Wired agazine, wrote an essay marking the tenth anniversary of the Netscape PO, in which he too concluded, in his own way, that this platform (what e calls "The Machine") for multiple forms of collaboration was indeed the tart of something very, very new and very, very big.
In the years roughly coincidental with the Netscape IPO, humans egan animating inert objects with tiny slivers of intelligence, connecting hem into a global field, and inkingMobile, heir own minds into a single thing.
From this embryonic neural net was bom a collaborative nterface for our civilization."
ONVERGENCE II  atformsthe basic underlying operating systems for innovation and roductiondo not change very often.
WalMart got big productivity boosts when it combined big-box storeswhere eople could buy soap supplies for six monthswith new, horizontal upply-chain management systems that allowed Wal-Mart instantly to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T onnect what a consumer took off the shelf from a Wal-Mart in Kansas ity with what a Wal-Mart supplier in coastal China could produce.
It is a rocess that I like to call "horizontalization," and it is the second big con ergence that is taking place today to make the world flat.
lobalization 2.0 was really the era of mainframe computing, which as very vertical  command-and-control oriented, with companies and heir individual departments tending to be organized in vertical silos.
lobalization 3.0, which is built around the convergence of the ten flat eners, and particularly the combination of the PC, the microprocessor, he Internet, and fiber optics, flipped the playing field from largely topdown to more side to side.
Innovations in companies like HP, she said, now come more nd more often from horizontal collaboration among different departments nd teams spread all across the globe.
For instance, HP, Cisco, and Nokia ollaborated on the development of a camera/cell phone that beams its dig tized pictures to an HP printer, which quickly prints them out.
Each com any had developed a very sophisticated technological specialty, but it ould add value only when its specialty was horizontally combined with he specialties of the other two companies.
In the past five years, HP has gone rom a company that had eighty-seven different supply chainseach man ged vertically and independently, with its own hierarchy of managers and ack-office supportto a company with just five supply chains that man ge $50 billion in business, and where functions like accounting, billing, nd human resources are handled through a companywide system.
Or, to put it differently, Southwest Airlines understood that he world was flat and that it could interface differently with its customers, nd vice versa, to improve its productivity and lower its costs.
For years the big challenge for WPP was how to get its own compa- HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE ies to collaborate/' said Allen Adamson, managing director of WPP's randing firm, Landor Associates.
"Now, though, it is often no longer nough just to get the companies in WPP to work together per se.
In reasingly, we find ourselves pulling together individuals from within ach of these companies to form a customized collaborative team just for ne client.
hen GE decided in 2003 to spin off its insurance businesses into a eparate company, WPP assembled a customized team to handle every hing from the naming of the new companyGenworthall the way own to itsfirstadvertising campaign and direct-marketing program.
In the case of E, we even gave a name to the virtual collaborative team we formed: lamath Communications."
It changed its office architecture and practicesbasically tearing own its walls and silos just like those companies that adjusted the ar hitecture of their steam-run factories to the electric motor.
By opening tself up this way, WPP actually unlocked so much more energy and in elligence.
Suddenly, it could look at all its employees from all its com anies as a vast pool of individual specialists, who could be assembled orizontally into any number of collaborative teams, depending on the nique demands of any given project.
hinking horizontally applies to everything from business to education o military planning.
I start thinking about how I can use the flatworld platformthat is, how I can use my own network or network of net orksto take the streaming video coming off that drone and feed it, live, o flat-screen TVs in the CIA, the DIA, the NSA, army intelligence, and ir force intelligence, and then integrate each of those analysts into a sin le chat room, so they can type in their responses to what they are seeing nd what sort of threat it poses, as the video is streaming, and that chat will ome up alongside the screen, so we all can analyze it together.
With that pproach, I have gotten away from vertical thinkingthat I, the air force, ontrol the drone in my silo and therefore my analysts alone must analyze he video and then tell the army in its silo what we have found.
Because all of us are smarter than one of us, y priority is not who controls the video but how do I create a horizontal esponse system to extract the most intelligence, from all of us, to under tand what the video is showing.
Just as we finished creating this new, more horizontal play ng field, and companies and individuals primarily in the West tarted quickly adapting to it, three billion people who had been locked HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E ut of the field suddenly found themselves liberated to plug and play ith everybody else.
I am talking about the people of China, India, Russia, Eastern urope, Latin America, and Central Asia.
Giving so many people access to all these tools of ollaboration, along with the ability through search engines and the Web to ccess billions of pages of raw information, ensures that the next generation f innovations will come from all over Planet Flat.
The scale of the global ommunity that is soon going to be able to participate in all sorts of discov ry and innovation is something the world has simply never seen before.
hroughout the Cold War there were just three major trading locsNorth America, Western Europe, and Japan plus East Asiaand he competition among the three was relatively controlled, since they ere all Cold War allies on the same side of the great global divide.
The wage rates in these three trading blocs were roughly the ame, the workforces roughly the same size, and the education levels oughly equivalent.
"You had a gentlemanly competition," noted Intel's hairman Craig Barrett.
ere's how it looked in round numbers: According to a November 004 study by Harvard University economist Richard B. Freeman, in 985 "the global economic world" consisted of North America, Western urope, Japan, as well as chunks of Latin America, Africa, and the coun ries of East Asia.
y 2000, as a result of the collapse of communism in the Soviet mpire, India's turn from autarky, China's shift to market capitalism, nd population growth all over, the global economic world expanded to ncompass 6 billion people.
s a result of this widening, another roughly 1.5 billion new workers ntered the global economic labor force, Freeman said, which is almost xactly double the number we would have had in 2000 had China, ndia, and the Soviet Empire not joined.
rue, maybe only 10 percent of this new 1.5 billion-strong workforce ntering the global economy have the education and connectivity to col aborate and compete at a meaningful level.
Said Barrett, 'You on't bring three billion people into the world economy overnight with ut huge consequences, especially from three societies [like India, China, nd Russia] with rich educational heritages."
These societies that we are now melding with ave a very high ethic of education.
In its November 30, 005, issue it ran a special report on the Indian middle class and its aspi ations.
The story, datelined Chennai, India, began like this: "In one of hennai's ubiquitous academic-coaching classes, a hundred 12th raders are crammed into a purple room, about 30 feet long and 25 feet ide.
The energy-sapping temperature is well over 100 degrees despite he constant whirr of overhead fans.
This intensive, seven-days-a-week class rep esents life as usual for these Indian high schoolers, who are hoping to arn an engineering slot at one of the colleges here in Chennai.
In India, putting a hild through engineering or medical college is, for many middle-class amilies, a life's mission in a way that is almost unknown in the United tates.
ccording to the Institute of International Education, India sent ore students to college in the United States in 2004-05 than did any ther country in the world.
According to the HE, 80,466 foreign students nrolled in the United States were from India, followed by 62,523 from hina, and 53,358 from South Korea.
India is a long ay away.
ndeed, a lot of those new players from India, China, and the former oviet Empire are not just walking onto the flat-world field with their normous hunger to get ahead by outlearning their competition.
What e are witnessing is a mad dashborn of fifty years of pent-up aspira ions in places like India, China, and the former Soviet Empire, where or five decades young people were educated, but not given an outlet at ome to really fulfill their potential.
That's the kind of explosion of aspirations coming out f India, China, and the former Soviet Empire today.
It means that they can move very fast to adopt new, state-ofthe-art technologies, which is why there are already more cell phones in se in China today than there are people in the United States.
To put it another way, any Chinese just went from no phones to cell phones in the space of a ecade.
One day after class, one of my students came up to me and told me his story: He and his Harvard colleagues had formed a student organiza ion with students in China.
They use Skype, with its free voice ver the Internet technology.
And most of those Chinese stu ents, he pointed out, didn't come from big cities but from smaller towns round China.
e tend to think of global trade and economics as something driven y the IMF, the G-8, the World Bank, the WTO, and the trade treaties orged by trade ministers.
he global economy from here forward will be shaped less by the onderous deliberations of finance ministers and more by the sponta eous explosion of energy from the zippies.
Well, now let me introduce the zippies.
The Zippies Are Here," declared the Indian weekly magazine utlook.
Zippies are the huge cohort of Indian youth who are the first to ome of age since India shifted away from socialism and dived headfirst nto global trade and the information revolution by turning itself into the orlds service center.
Outlook called India's zippies "Liberalization's hildren" and defined a zippie as a "young city or suburban resident, be ween 15 and 25 years of age, with a zip in the stride.
Indian zippies feel no guilt about making oney or spending it.
They are, says one Indian analyst quoted by Outlook, destination driven, not destiny driven, outward looking, not inward, up ardly mobile, not stuck-in-my-station-in-life."
With 54 percent of India nder the age of twenty-fivethat's 555 million peoplesix out of ten ndian households have at least one potential zippie.
And the zippies don't ust have a pent-up demand for good jobs; they want the good life.
P. V. Kannan, the C E O and cofounder of the ndian call-center company 24/7 Customer, told me that in the last ecade, he went from sweating out whether he would ever get a chance o work in America to becoming one of the leading figures in the out ourcing of services from America to the rest of the world.
in char ered accountancy from the [Indian] Institute of Chartered Accountants.
And we both ot job offers through a body shop [a recruiting firm specializing in im orting Indian talent for companies in America] to work as programmers or IBM.
In those days, there was always a very long ine to get visas to the United States, and there were people who would ctually sleep in the line and hold places and you could go buy their  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lace for 20 rupees.
His job was to ask questions and try to figure out hether we were going to do the work and then come back to India or try o stay in America.
here were actually books and seminars in India devoted entirely to he subject of how to prepare for a work visa interview at the U.S. embassy.
t was the only way for skilled Indian engineers really to exploit their tal nt.
hile many Indians still want to come to America to work and study, hanks to the triple convergence many of them can now compete at the ighest levels, and be decently paid, by staying at home.
Because you can now innovate without having to emigrate, more nd more world-class innovation, particularly in software, is now starting rom Indianot just being worked on from India.
P. Anandan, an Indian-American omputer engineer who worked for Microsoft in Redmond, returned to ndia in 2005 to open Microsoft's research center in Bangalore.
"I have wo non-Indians working for me here, one Japanese and one American, HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE nd they could work anywhere in the world," Anandan told me.
He added hat when he got his engineering degree in India twenty-eight years ago, ll the competition was to get a job abroad.
Now the fiercest competition s to get an IT job in India: "It is no longer, 'Well I have to stay here,' but, Do I get a chance to stay here?'"
ne of the most dynamic young pluggers and players I met in India as Rajesh Rao, founder and C E O of Dhruva Interactive, a small game ompany based in Bangalore.
He and his firm show us what appens when an Indian zippie plugs into the ten flatteners.
When I stopped in for a visit, I found two loors of Indian game designers and artists, trained in computer graphics, orking on PCs, drawing various games and animated characters for merican and European clients.
In 2004, it bought the rights to se Charlie Chaplin's image for mobile computer games.
That's right  start-up Indian game company today owns the Chaplin image for use in obile computer games.
n Bangalore and in later e-mail conversations, I asked Rajesh, who is n his mid-thirties, to walk me through how he became a player in the lobal game business from Bangalore.
The first defining moment for me dates back to the early nineties," aid Rajesh, a smallish, mustachioed figure with the ambition of a heavy eight boxer.
"Having lived and worked in Europe, as a student, I was lear in my choice that I would not leave India.
I wanted to do my thing rom India, do something that would be globally respected and some hing that would make a difference in India.
In March 1997, we partnered with Intel and began the process of rein enting ourselves into a gaming company.
The computer game business is lready enormous, every year grossing more revenue than Hollywood, nd it already had some tradition of outsourcing game characters to ountries like Canada and Australia.
None of us had ver seen a real saloon before, but we researched the look and feel [of a aloon] using the Internet and Google.
We wanted potential clients in the U.S.A. and Europe to be con inced that Indians can 'get it.'
The first as to have enough installed bandwidth so he could e-mail game con- HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE ent and instructions back and forth between his own company and his merican clients.
"The enetration is relatively decent even in India today."
he third factor, though, was the emergence of the work flow software nd Internet applications that made it possible for a Dhruva to go into busi ess as a minimultinational from day one: Word, Outlook, NetMeeting, D Studio MAX.
But Google is the key.
"One f the things that's always an issue for our clients from the West is, 'Will ou Indians be able to understand the subtle nuances of Western con ent?'
But the Internet as helped us to be able to aggregate different kinds of content at the ouch of a button, and today if someone asks you to make something that ooks like Tom and Jerry, you just say 'Google Tom and Jerry' and you've ot tons and tons of pictures and information and reviews and write-ups bout Tom and Jerry, which you can read and simulate."
It was he fact that all over the world, people, en masse, were starting to get com ortable with the new global infrastructure.
"There is a lot more we can do with his infrastructure, as more and more people shift to becoming paperless n their offices and realize that distances really [do] not matter .
oreover, in the old days, these software programs would have been riced beyond the means of a little Indian game start-up, but not any ore, thanks in part to the open-source free software movement.
icrosoft Windows, Office, 3D Studio MAX, Adobe Photoshopeach f these programs would have been priced higher than they are today if ot for the many freeware/shareware programs that were comparable nd compelling.
The Internet brought to the table the element of choice  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nd instant comparison that did not exist before for a little company like urs .
They con ect into the company's internal system over the Internet, using a secure eature called VPN [virtual private network], making their presence no ifferent from the guy in the next cubicle."
he Internet now makes this whole world "like one marketplace," dded Rajesh.
"This infrastructure is not only going to facilitate sourcing f work to the best price, best quality, from the best place, it is also going o enable a great amount of sharing of practices and knowledge, and it's oing to be 'I can learn from you and you can learn from me' like never efore.
here is no reason the United States should not benefit from this rend, Rajesh insisted.
What Dhruva is doing is pioneering computer aming within Indian society.
When the Indian market starts to embrace aming as a mainstream social activity, Dhruva will already be positioned o take advantage.
Every perceived dol ar or opportunity that is lost today [from an American point of view be ause of outsourcing] is actually going to come back to you times ten, nce the market here is unleashed .
Just remember, we are a threehundred-million middle class, larger than the size of your country or urope."
es, he noted, India right now has a great advantage in having a pool f educated, low-wage English speakers with a strong service etiquette in heir DNA and an enterprising spirit.
"So, sure, for the moment, we are eading the so-called wave of service outsourcing of various kinds of new hings," said Rajesh.
If [Indians] think that they've got something going nd there is something they can keep that's not going to go anywhere, HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E hat will be a big mistake, because we have got Eastern Europe, which is aking up, and we have got China, which is waiting to get on the ser ices bandwagon to do various things.
I mean, you can source the best roduct or service or capacity or competency from anywhere in the orld today, because of this whole infrastructure that is being put into lace.
The only thing that inhibits you from doing that is your readiness o make use of this infrastructure.
So as different businesses, and as dif erent people, get more comfortable using this infrastructure, you are go ng to see a huge explosion.
So today India is ahead, but it has to work very ard if it wants to keep this position.
he raw ambition that Rajesh and so many of his generation possess s worthy of note by Americansa point I elaborate on later.
"I think in the case of the United States hat is what happened a bit.
Please look at me: I am from India.
ut once we saw we had an infrastructure which made the world a small lace, we promptly tried to make the best use of it.
And if you are able to emonstrate your work, using the same infrastructure, and if people are omfortable giving work to you, and if you are diligent and clean in your ransactions, then you are in business."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T nstead of complaining about outsourcing, said Rajesh, Americans nd Western Europeans would "be better off thinking about how you an raise your bar and raise yourselves into doing something better.
mericans have consistently led in innovation over the last century.
They came rom Sri Lanka."
Among the three or four caps we got uotations for, this [Sri Lankan one] was the best in terms of quality and he right price, and we thought the finish was great.
"If you are seeing all this energy coming out of Indians, it's ecause we have been underdogs and we have that drive to kind of chieve and to get there .
India is going to be a superpower and we are oing to rule."
The world is a football field now and you've got to be HE RIPLE CONVERGENCE harp to be on the team which plays on that field.
in Bangalore ten years ago, the best place to meet zippies in Beijing oday is in the line at the consular section of the U.S. embassy.
In eijing in the summer of 2004,1 discovered that the quest by Chinese stu ents for visas to study or work in America was so intense that it had pawned dedicated Internet chat rooms, where Chinese students swapped tories about which arguments worked best with which U.S. embassy con ular officials.
Just how intensely hinese students strategize over the Internet was revealed, U.S. embassy fficials told me, when one day a rookie U.S. consular official had stu ent after student come before him with the same line that some chat oom had suggested would work for getting a visa: "I want to go to merica to become a famous professor."
As one U.S. embassy official in Beijing said to me, What I see happening [in China] is what has been going on for the last everal decades in the rest of Asiathe tech booms, the tremendous en rgy of the people.
The Chinese have started o tour the world in large numbers, and as China continues to develop oward a more open society, it is quite likely that Chinese leisure tourists ill alter the whole world-tourism industry.
The fall 1985 class had 71 raduate and undergraduate students from China and 1 from the Soviet nion.
The fall 2003 class had 297 Chinese graduate and undergraduate tudents and 23 Russians.
Yale's total international student contingent ent from 836 in the fall of 1985 to 1,775 in the fall of 2003.
Applications rom Chinese and Russian high school students to attend Yale as under raduates have gone from a total of 40 Chinese for the class of 2001 to 76 for the class of 2008, and from 18 Russians for the class of 2001 to 30 or the class of 2008.
In 1999, Yiting Liu, a schoolgirl from Chengdu, hina, got accepted to Harvard on a full scholarship.
The book, in Chinese, titled arvard Girl Yiting Liu, offered "scientifically proven methods" to get our Chinese kid into Harvard.
The book became a runaway bestseller n China.
In 2004,1 was a speaker for the 150th an iversary of Washington University in St. Louis, a school noted for its trength in science and engineering.
He entioned in passing that in the spring of 2001 he had been invited HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE along with many other foreign and American academic leaders) to singhua University in Beijing, one of the finest in China, to participate n the celebration of its ninetieth anniversary.
The Chinese had rought academics from all over the world to Tsinghua more than ten housand people attended the ceremonyin order to make the declara ion "that at the one hundredth anniversary Tsinghua University would e among the world's premier universities," Wrighton later explained to e in an e-mail.
With Tsinghua University already regarded as ne of the leading universities in China, focused on science and tech ology, it was evident that there is a seriousness of purpose in striving for  world leadership position in [all the areas involved] in spawning tech ological innovation."
nd as a result of China's drive to succeed, Microsoft chairman Bill ates argued to me, the "ovarian lottery" has changedas has the whole elationship between geography and talent.
Now," he said, "I would rather be a genius born in China than an av rage guy born in Poughkeepsie."
"We're going to tap into the energy and talent offivetimes as many eople as we did before," said Gates.
HE ROM RUSSIA W I T H  O R L D IS F L A T OVE idn't get a chance to visit Russia and interview Russian zippies for this ook, but I did the next best thing.
I asked my friend Thomas R. ickering, the former U.S. ambassador to Moscow and now a top inter ational relations executive with Boeing, to explain a new development I ad heard about: that Boeing was using Russian engineers and scientists, ho once worked on MiGs, to help design its next generation of passen er planes.
Beginning in 1991, Boeing tarted assigning out work to Russian scientists to take advantage of their ex ertise in aerodynamic problems and new aviation alloys.
Boeing located the office in the twelve-story oscow tower that McDonald's built with all the rubles it made from sell ng Big Macs in Moscow before the end of communismmoney that cDonald's had pledged not to take out of the country.
even years later, said Pickering, "we now have eight hundred Russian ngineers and scientists working for us and we're going up to at least one housand and maybe, over time, tofifteenhundred."
The way it works, he ex lained, is that Boeing contracts with different Russian aircraft companies ompanies that were famous in the Cold War for making warplanes, ompanies with names like Ilyushin, Tupolev, and Sukhoiand they pro ide the engineers-to-order for Boeing's different projects.
Using Frenchmade airplane design software, the Russian engineers collaborate with their olleagues at Boeing Americain both Seattle and Wichita, Kansasin omputer-aided airplane designs.
sing fiber-optic cables, advanced compression technologies, and aero autical work flow software, "they just pass their designs back and forth rom Moscow to America," Pickering said.
There are videoconferencing acilities on every floor of Boeing's Moscow office, so the engineers don't ave to rely on e-mail when they have a problem to solve with their merican counterparts.
oeing started outsourcing airplane design work to Moscow as an ex- HE TRIPLE CONVERGENCE riment, a sideline; but today, with a shortage of aeronautical engineers n America, it is a necessity.
Boeing's ability to blend these lower-cost ussian engineers with higher-cost, more advanced American design eams is enabling Boeing to compete head-to-head with its archrival, irbus Industries, which is subsidized by a consortium of European gov rnments and is using Russian talent as well.
A U.S. aeronautical engi eer costs $120 per design hour; a Russian costs about one-third of that.
The Russian engineers have utsourced elements of their work for Boeing to Hindustan Aeronautics n Bangalore, which specializes in digitizing airplane designs to make hem easier to manufacture.
In the old days, xplained Pickering, Boeing would say to its Japanese subcontractors, We will send you the plans for the wings of the 777.
oday Boeing says to the giant Japanese industrial company Mitsu ishi, "Here are the general parameters for the wings of the new 7E7.
But Japanese engineers are ery expensive.
Mitsubishi outsources elements of the utsourced 7E7 wing to the same Russian engineers Boeing is using for ther parts of the plane.
Meanwhile, some of these Russian engineers nd scientists are leaving the big Russian airplane companies and setting p their own firms, and Boeing is considering buying shares in some of hese start-ups to have reserve engineering capacity.
o make sure that it is getting the best deals on its parts and other sup lies, Boeing now runs regular "reverse auctions," in which companies HE  O R L D IS F L A T id down against each other rather than bid up against each other.
Boeing will announce an auction for a stated time on a specially esigned Internet site.
To say t again, the dot-com bust actually drove globalization into hypermode y forcing companies to outsource and offshore more and more func ions in order to save on scarce capital.
Between the dot-com bust and today, oogle went from processing roughly 150 million searches per day to ore than one billion searches per day, with only a third coming from nside the United States.
Between 2000 and 2004, total global Internet usage grew 125 ercent, including 186 percent in Africa, 209 percent in Latin America, 24 percent in Europe, and 105 percent in North America, according to ielsen/NetRatings.
Given 9/11, and the Afghanistan and Iraq inva ions that followed, it's not surprising that the triple convergence was lost n the fog of war and the chatter of cable television.
Finally, there was the nron corporate governance scandal, quickly followed by blowups at yco and WorldComwhich all sent CEOs and the Bush administra ion running for cover.
In the pring of 2004,1 met with the head of one of America's biggest technol gy companies, who had come to Washington to lobby for more federal unding for the National Science Foundation to help nurture a stronger ndustrial base for American industry.
I asked him why the administra ion wasn't convening a summit of CEOs to highlight this issue, and he ust shook his head and said one word: "Enron."
During the 2004 election ampaign we saw the Democrats debating whether NAFTA was a good dea and the Bush White House putting duct tape over the mouth of .
Gregory Mankiw, the chairman of the White House Council of conomic Advisers, and stashing him away in Dick Cheney's basement, ecause Mankiw, author of a popular college economics textbook, had ared to speak approvingly of outsourcing as just the "latest manifesta ion of the gains from trade that economists have talked about at least ince Adam Smith."
Until I visited India in early 2004,1 oo was largely ignorant of it, although I was picking up a few hints that omething was brewing.
ortunately, the cutting-edge global companies knew what was going on ut there, and the best companies were quietly adapting to it so that they ould not be one of those dinosaurs.
They had to if they wanted their companies just to survive, let lone thrive.
That is, the iring of the world with fiber-optic cable, the Internet, and work flow oftware has blown down many of the walls that prevented collaboration.
They will affect ow individuals, communities, and companies organize themselves, here companies and communities stop and start, how individuals bal nce their different identities as consumers, employees, shareholders, nd citizens, how people define themselves politically, and what role overnment plays in managing all of this flux.
first began thinking about the great sorting out after a conversation ith Harvard University's noted political theorist Michael J. Sandel.
ndeed, reading the Communist Manifesto today, I am in awe at how ncisively Marx detailed the forces that were flattening the world during he rise of the Industrial Revolution, and how much he foreshadowed he way these same forces would keep flattening the world right up to the resent.
n one word, it creates a world after its own image.
What you are arguing is that developments in information technol gy are enabling companies to squeeze out all the inefficiencies and riction from their markets and business operations.
But some of these ineffi iencies are institutions, habits, cultures, and traditions that people cher sh precisely because they reflect nonmarket values like social cohesion, eligious faith, and national pride.
And each time, the question for society arises with renewed ur ency: To what extent should we stand aside, 'get with the program,' and o all we can to squeeze out yet more inefficiencies, and to what extent hould we lean against the current for the sake of values that global mar ets can't supply?
he flattening process simultaneously broke the traditional newspapers' onopoly on classified advertising (thanks to Google), its near monopoly n written news and commentary (thanks to bloggers), and its monopoly n distribution (thanks to the Internet).
'The Internet has done what no con umer advocate could ever do: It has reduced the distance between the onsumer and the real estate expert to the point where the consumer is so uch more informed, they don't need the expert as much as they used to,' ays Art Raby, an agent for McColly Real Estate in Valparaiso, I n d .
In 995, just 2% of home buyers used the Internet to look for a home.
Last ear, 77% of home shoppers went house-hunting online, and nearly one-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ourth of buyers first found the property they bought on the Internet, ac ording to the National Association of Realtors."
Are we all going to uy homes on the Internet?
onday Morning, one of Scandinavia's leading independent think anks, found a compelling way to describe the disorienting sorting-out rocess that many institutions are now going through: "With accelerating peed, we have moved from the industrial society via the knowledge soci ty to the present stage of a disintegrating society" on our way to "a new lobal collaborative society" in which "old power structures and lessons earned are challenged by new market forces and values."
Anthropologists and istorians tell us that rapid social change is highly destabilizing.
We need agreed-upon ays of establishing authority and building communities, doing work, rotecting copyrights, and determining whom to trust.
After all, al-Qaeda is a network, nd the values that it promotes are hardly enhancing of peace, tranquility, nd the global community.
Recall the oison that was spread on Wikipedia about John Seigenthaler Sr.
The big ie that Jews were warned not to go to work at the World Trade Center on he morning of 9/11 began somewhere in the Muslim world and spread ike a wildfire on the Internet, and no amount of news stories debunking t could eradicate that rumor.
or all of these reasons, the ceilings, walls, and floors that will define s in the future are likely to be blended, collaborative models, which ombine the old and the new.
Traditional nation-states, governments, orporations, and news organizations will have to work together with mergent networks, virtual communities, superempowered individuals, nd companies to hammer out the new norms, new boundaries, new echanisms for operating in the flat world.
From the Indian orker's perspective, that same form of collaboration, outsourcing, could e seen as another name for empowering individuals in the developing orld as never before, enabling them to nurture, exploit, and profit from heir God-given intellectual talentstalents that before the flattening of he world often rotted on the docks of Mumbai and Calcutta.
Looking at t from the American corner of the flat world, you might conclude that he frictions, barriers, and values that restrain outsourcing should be aintained, maybe even strengthened.
onsider this real-world case: In 2003, the state of Indiana put out to id a contract to upgrade the state's computer systems that process un mployment claims.
Tata America International, hich is the U.S.-based subsidiary of India's Tata Consultancy Services td.
Tata's bid of $15.2 million came in $8.1 million lower than that of ts closest rivals, the New York-based companies Deloitte Consulting nd Accenture Ltd. No Indiana firms bid on the contract, because it was oo big for them to handle.
n other words, an Indian consulting firm won the contract to upgrade he unemployment department of the state of Indiana!
Indiana was outsourcing the very department that would cushion he people of Indiana from the effects of outsourcing.
Tata was planning to end some sixty-five contract employees to work in the Indiana Govern ent Center, alongside eighteen state workers.
Tata also said it would hire ocal subcontractors and do some local recruiting, but most workers would ome from India to do the computer overhauls, which, once completed, ere "supposed to speed the processing of unemployment claims, as well HE GREAT SORTING OUT s save postage and reduce hassles for businesses that pay unemployment axes," the Indianapolis Star reported on June 25, 2004.
It became such a political hot otato that Governor Joe Kernan, a Democrat who had succeeded 'Bannon, ordered the state agency, which helps out-of-work Indiana res dents, to cancel the contractand also to put up some legal barriers and riction to prevent such a thing from happening again.
He also ordered hat the contract be broken up into smaller bites that Indiana firms could id forgood for Indiana firms but very costly and inefficient for the tate.
The Indianapolis Star reported that a check for $993,587 was sent o pay off Tata for eight weeks of work, during which it had trained fortyfive state programmers in the development and engineering of up-to-date oftware: "'The company was great to work with,' said Alan Degner, ndiana's commissioner of workforce development."
o now I have just one simple question: Who is the exploiter and who s the exploited in this India-Indiana story?
The American arm of an ndian consulting firm proposes to save the taxpayers of Indiana $8.1 mil ion by revamping their computers using both its Indian employees nd local hires from Indiana.
The deal would greatly benefit the Ameri an arm of the Indian consultancy; it would benefit some Indiana tech orkers; and it would save Indiana state residents precious tax dollars hat could be deployed to hire more state workers somewhere else, or uild new schools that would permanently shrink its roles of unem loyed.
Were the Indian engineers not being "exploited" when their overnment educated them in some of the best technical institutes in the orld inside India, but then that same Indian government pursued a so ialist economic policy that could not provide those engineers with work n India, so that those who could not get out of India had to drive taxis to at?
Are those same engineers now being exploited when they join the iggest consulting company in India, are paid a very comfortable wage in ndian terms, and, thanks to the flat world, can now apply their skills glob lly?
Or are those Indian engineers now exploiting the people of Indiana y offering to revamp their state unemployment system for much less oney than an American consulting firm?
Or were the people of Indiana xploiting those cheaper Indian engineers?
Or with the politicians of Indiana, who anted to deprive these Indian engineers of work so that it could be done, ore expensively, by their constituents?
With those who want to hold down taxes nd shrink the state budget of Indiana by outsourcing some work, or with hose who say, "Let's raise taxes more in order to reserve the work here and eserve it just for people from Indiana"?
With those who want to keep ome friction in the system, even though that goes against every Repub ican instinct on free trade, just to help people from Indiana?
If you are gainst globalization because you think it harms people in developing ountries, whose side are you on in this story: India's or Indiana's?
he India versus Indiana dispute highlights the difficulties in drawing ines between the interests of two communities that never before imagined hey were connected, much less collaborators.
But suddenly they each oke up and discovered that in a flat world, where work increasingly be omes a horizontal collaboration, they were not only connected and col aborating but badly in need of a social contract to govern their relations.
he larger point here is this: Whether we are talking about manage- HE REAT SORTING OUT ent science or political science, manufacturing or research and devel pment, many, many players and processes are going to have to come to rips with "horizontalization."
In the past, though, a country benefited from and depended pon the success or hegemony of its leading companies to define its conomic well-being and its standing in the world.
What happens as usinesses define their interests and labor opportunities more globally han domestically, and as the whole shareholding process demands ore and more that these companies perform against global standards, pportunities, and resources?
What happens is that the interests and eeds of these companies align less and less perfectly with those of the ational domains (the countries) in which they are headquartered.
But today t would be said, "As Dell goes, so goes Malaysia, Taiwan, China, reland, India .
It is not only the largest consumer technology com any in the world; it is the largest IT company in Europe, the largest IT ompany in Russia, the largest IT company in the Middle East, and the argest IT company in South Africa.
Corporations cannot survive oday as entities bounded by any single nation-state, not even one as ig as the United States.
"It has done that by outsourcing s many components as possible to the cheapest, most efficient suppliers.
f Dell can build every component of its computers in coastal China and ell them in coastal America, Dell benefits, and American consumers enefit, but it is hard to make the case that American labor benefits."
What this will mean for the long-term elationship between companies and the country in which they are eadquartered is simply unclear.
onsider this vivid example: On December 7, 2004, IBM an ounced that it was selling its whole Personal Computing Division to he Chinese computer company Lenovo to create a new worldwide PC ompanythe globe's third largestwith approximately $12 billion in nnual revenue.
Simultaneously, though, IBM said that it would be aking an 18.9 percent equity stake in Lenovo, creating a strategic al-  H E GREAT SORTING OUT iance between IBM and Lenovo in PC sales, financing, and service orldwide.
The new combined company's worldwide headquarters, it as announced, would be in New York, but its principal manufactur ng operations would be in Beijing and Raleigh, North Carolina; re earch centers would be in China, the United States, and Japan; and ales offices would be around the world.
The new Lenovo will be the referred supplier of PCs to IBM, and IBM will also be the new enovo's preferred supplier of services and financing.
About ten thousand people will move from IBM o Lenovo, which was created in 1984 and was the first company to intro uce the home computer concept in China.
Since 1997, Lenovo has been he leading PC brand in China.
[He's currently C E O of Lenovo.]
[She's cur ently C F O of Lenovo.]"
To which country will Lenovo feel more attached?
his question was anticipated in the press release announcing the ew company: "Where will Lenovo be headquartered?"
nswer: "As a global business, the new Lenovo will be geographically ispersed, with people and physical assets located worldwide."
But they do want sustainable companies.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T nd residentswhether they are Americans, Europeans, or Indianswant o know that the good jobs are going to stay close to home.
ranslation: If I can buy five brilliant researchers in China and/or ndia for the price of one in Europe or America, I will buy the five; and f, in the long run, that means my own society loses part of its skills base, o be it.
Sir John Rose, the chief executive of Rolls-Royce, told e once, "We have a big business in Germany.
And he said to me, Tou are a German ompany, why don't you come along with me on my next visit to Russia'  o try to drum up business there for German companies."
The German hancellor, said Rose, "was recognizing that although my headquarters ere in London, my business was involved in creating value in Germany, nd that could be constructive in his relationship with Russia."
ere you have the quintessential British company, Rolls-Royce, hich, though still headquartered in England, now operates through a orizontal global supply chain, and its C E O , a British citizen knighted y the queen, is being courted by the chancellor of Germany to help him HE GREAT SORTING OUT rum up business in Russia, because one link in the Rolls-Royce supply hain happens to run through Brandenburg.
y friend Glen Fukushima is an American of Japanese ancestry.
is father, also a Japanese American, was based in Japan with the U.S. rmy, so Glen was born in a U.S. military hospital there in 1949.
He raduated from Stanford and Harvard and eventually moved in 1985 rom law practice to become director for Japanese affairs at the Office f the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) and then deputy assistant STR for Japan and China, representing the United States in its tough rade disputes with these two Asian giants.
In 1997 he was lected by his American peers to be president of the American hamber of Commerce in Japan, a volunteer job he held with great istinction.
I asked ukushima about his work, and he surprised me by announcing that e had a new job: He had just become the president of Japan opera ions for the European consortium Airbus.
He was now running the apan business of the crown jewel manufacturing company of Europe, elping it try to beat out the crown jewel manufacturing company of merica, Boeing, in selling passenger aircraft to Japan, the country of is ancestors.
When I joined Airbus, the U.S. embassy here told me that I was no onger allowed to attend the monthly meeting that the board of gover ors of the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan has with the .S.
uite a few ACCJ board members who attended the monthly meeting, or instance, were U.S. citizens who had started their own companies n Japan, with no U.S. operations or employees, or they were U.S. citi ens working for non-U.S. companies, or they were Japanese citizens orking for American companies.
Moreover, roughly 35 percent of the ew Boeing 787's airframe is being made in Japan by Mitsubishi Heavy ndustries and other Japanese manufacturers.
Another significant amount s being made or designed in Europe, Russia, China, and other places  ven though Boeing (which is headquartered in Chicago) is usually outed as "America's biggest exporter."
He an wered with one word: "Google."
Now I just type into Google 'UNSC Resolution 242' and up comes he text," he said.
owell, a former member of the AOL board, also regularly used e-mail  H E GREAT SORTING OUT o contact other foreign ministers and, according to one of his aides, kept p a constant instant-messaging relationship with Britain's foreign secre ary, Jack Straw, at summit meetings, as if they were a couple of college stu ents.
Thanks to the cell phone and wireless technology, said Powell, no oreign minister can run and hide from him.
He said he had been looking or Russia's foreign minister the previous week.
t really hit me when Powell's junior media adviser, a young woman, alked me down from his office and remarked along the way that be ause of e-mail, Powell could get hold of her and her boss at any hour, ia their BlackBerrysand did.
I can't get away from the guy," she said jokingly of his constant e-mail nstructions.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T ULTIPLE DENTITY ISORDER   is not only communities and companies that have multiple identities hat will need sorting out in a flat world.
And hen companies turn to employees and say, 'If we don't give them more or less, we are in trouble.
he New York Times reported (November 1, 2004) that Wal-Mart spent bout $1.3 billion of its $256 billion in revenue in 2003 on employee ealth care, to insure about 537,000 people, or about 45 percent of its orkforce.
Wal-Mart's biggest competitor, though, Costco Wholesale, in ured 96 percent of its eligible full-time or part-time employees.
Costco mployees become eligible for health insurance after three months work ng full-time or six months working part-time.
At Wal-Mart, most full-time mployees have to wait six months to become eligible, while part-timers re not eligible for at least two years.
According to the Times, full-time mployees at Wal-Mart make about $1,200 per month, or $8 per hour.
al-Mart-sponsored health plans have monthly premiums for family overage ranging as high as $264 and out-of-pocket expenses as high as 13,000 in some cases, and such medical costs make health coverage unaffordable even for many Wal-Mart employees who are covered, the imes said.
Costco's pre ax profit margin is only 2.7 percent of revenue, less than half Wal-Mart's argin of 5.5 percent.
ut wait a minute, doesn't the Wal-Mart shopper in all of us want he lowest prices possible, with all the middlemen, fat, and friction re oved?
isten to his argument: "Wal-Mart's critics allege that the retailer is bad or poor Americans.
This claim is backward: As Jason Furman of New ork University puts it, Wal-Mart is a progressive success story.'
Furman dvised John 'Benedict Arnold' Kerry in the 2004 campaign and has ever received any payment from Wal-Mart; he is no corporate apolo ist.
But he points out that Wal-Mart's discounting on food alone boosts he welfare of American shoppers by at least $50 billion a year.
The sav ngs are possibly five times that much if you count all of Wal-Mart's roducts.
The average Wal-Mart customer earns $35,000 a year, ompared with $50,000 at Target and $74,000 at Costco.
As a force for poverty relief, Wal-Mart's $200 billion-plus assis ance to consumers may rival many federal programs."
o the Wal-Mart shareholder and shopper in us wants Wal-Mart to be elentless about removing the fat and friction in its supply chain and in ts employee benefits packages in order to fatten the company's profits  nd to keep its prices low.
But the Wal-Mart worker in us hates the lim ted benefits and low pay packages that Wal-Mart offers its starting mployees.
And the Wal-Mart citizen in us knows that because WalMart, the biggest company in America, doesn't cover all its employees ith health care, some of them will just go to the emergency ward of the ocal hospital and the taxpayers will end up picking up the tab.
The imes reported that a survey by Georgia officials found that "more than 0,000 children of Wal-Mart employees were in the state's health pro ram for children at an annual cost of nearly $10 million to taxpayers."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T imilarly, it said, a "North Carolina hospital found that 31 percent of ,900 patients who described themselves as Wal-Mart employees were n Medicaid, while an additional 16 percent had no insurance at all."
n her 2004 book, Selling Women Short: The Landmark Battle for orkers' Rights at Wal-Mart, journalist Liza Featherstone followed the uge women's discrimination suit against Wal-Mart.
In an interview bout the book with Salon.com (November 22, 2004), she made the fol owing important point: "American taxpayers chip in to pay for many ull-time Wal-Mart employees because they usually require incremental ealth insurance, public housing, food stampsthere are so many ways n which Wal-Mart employees are not able to be self-sufficient.
It is really troubling and dishonest that Wal-Mart sup orts Republican candidates in the way that they do: 80 percent of their orporate campaign contributions go to Republicans.
But Republicans end not to support the types of public assistance programs that Wal-Mart epends on.
If anything, Wal-Mart should be crusading for national ealth insurance.
s you sort out and weigh your multiple identitiesconsumer, em loyee, citizen, taxpayer, shareholderyou have to decide: Do you prefer he Wal-Mart approach or the Costco approach?
How much friction would you like to see government re ove, through deregulation, to make it easier for companies to compete n Planet Flat?
The result, how ver, has been an increasingly cozy relationship between the FDA and he pharmaceutical industry, which has put public health at risk.
A recent Senate earing on Vioxx's recall revealed major deficiencies in the FDA's abil ty to remove dangerous drugs from the market."
And from the other side, ow do we keep walls low enough so that we encourage the sharing of ntellectual property, which is required more and more to do cuttingedge innovation?
The world is decidedly not flat when it comes to uniform treatment f intellectual property," said Craig Mundie, Microsoft's chief technology fficer.
Companies can do one of three things with an innovation: hey can patent the widget they invent and sell it themselves; they can atent it and license it to someone else to manufacture; or they can atent it and cross-license with several other companies so that they all ave freedom of action to make a productlike a PCthat comes from elding many different patents.
But the way established case law has evolved, experts tell me, t is decidedly biased against cross-licensing and other arrangements that ncourage collaboration or freedom of action for as many players as pos ible; it is more focused on protecting the rights of individual firms to anufacture their own patents.
In a flat world, companies need a patent ystem that encourages both approaches.
The more your legal structure osters cross-licensing and standards, the more collaborative innovation ou will get.
o, with more and more innovation emerging from open-source ollaborations and communities, intellectual property law has to ad ustor else we as a society will not get the benefits or be protected rom the drawbacks of a flat world.
"For collaborative innovation to lourish, we must rethink our ideas about intellectual property," ar ues IBM's chairman Sam Palmisano.
"Intellectual property laws ere created to enable individuals and institutions to reap the rewards f their inventions, while at the same time making these intellectual ssets available for society as a whole.
We must protect the inter sts of individuals and companies that create truly new, novel, and use ul inventions.
But at the same time, we need to protect the interests of nnovative communities, creative ecosystemsgroups that are not in orporated or chartered but that nonetheless are engaged in gen ineand genuinely importantinnovation.
n December 21,2004, the Associated Press reported that his family was emanding that Yahoo!
give them the password for their deceased son's -mail account so they could have access to all his e-mail, including otes to and from others.
The AP reported that Yahoo!
denied the Ellsworth family their on's password, citing the fact that Yahoo!
policy calls for erasing all ac ounts that are inactive for ninety days and the fact that all Yahoo!
"While we sympathize with any grieving family, Yahoo!
ccounts and any contents therein are nontransferable" even after death, aren Mahon, a Yahoo!
H E W O R L D IS F L A T EATH F HE ALESMEN   the fall of 2004,1 went out to Minneapolis to visit my mother and had hree world-is-flat encounters right in a row.
"Everything is by e-mail now," he said.
I am dealing with a young kid at [one of the biggest retailers in the na ion], and he says, 'Just e-mail me your bid.'
It's hard to create a human bond with -mail and streaming Internet.
es, the consumer in us wants Wal-Mart prices, with all the fat gone.
ut the employee in us wants a little fat left on the bone, the way Costco oes it, so that it can offer health care to almost all its employees, rather han just less than half of them, as Wal-Mart does.
But the shareholder in s wants Wal-Mart's profit margins, not Costco's.
Yet the citizen in us ants Costco's benefits, rather than Wal-Mart's, because the difference ltimately may have to be paid for by society.
Think  H E W O R L D IS F L A T bout it: Social conservatives from the right wing of the Republican party, ho do not like globalization or closer integration with the world because t brings too many foreigners and foreign cultural mores into America, ight align themselves with unions from the left wing of the Democratic arty, who don't like globalization for the way it facilitates the outsourcing nd offshoring of jobs.
Let's face it: Republican cultural onservatives have much more in common with the steelworkers of oungstown, Ohio, the farmers of rural China, and the mullahs of central audi Arabia, who would also like more walls, than they do with invest ent bankers on Wall Street or service workers linked to the global econ my in Palo Alto, who have been enriched by the flattening of the world.
eanwhile, the business wing of the Republican Party, which be ieves in free trade, deregulation, more integration, and lower taxes verything that would flatten the world even moremay end up aligning tself with the social liberals of the Democratic Party, many of whom are ast Coast or West Coast global service industry workers.
In short, in a flat world, we re likely to see many social liberals, white-collar global service industry orkers, and Wall Street types driven together, and many social conserv tives, white-collar local service industry workers, and labor unions riven together.
he Passion of the Christ audience will be in the same trench with he Teamsters and the AFL-CIO, while the Hollywood and Wall Street iberals and the You've Got Mail crowd will be in the same trench with he high-tech workers of Silicon Valley and the global service providers f Manhattan and San Francisco.
Countries, companies, and individuals will be able to give intelligent nswers to these questions only if they understand the real nature and exture of the global playing field and how different it is from the one that xisted in the Cold War era and before.
And countries, companies, and ndividuals will be able to make sound political choices only if they fully ppreciate the flattened playing field and understand all the new tools ow available to them for collaborating and competing on it.
o that end, the next three sections look at how the flattening of the orld and the triple convergence will affect Americans, developing ountries, and companies.
an American who has always believed in the merits of free trade,  had an important question to answer after my India trip: Should  still believe in free trade in a flat world?
Wouldn't individual Americans be better off if our government rected some walls and banned some outsourcing and offshoring?
first wrestled with this issue while filming the Discovery Times docu entary in Bangalore.
One day we went to the Infosys campus around five .m.
just when the Infosys call-center workers were flooding into the rounds for the overnight shift on foot, minibus, and motor scooter, while any of the more advanced engineers were leaving at the end of the day hift.
o if all these Indian techies were doing what was their comparative advan age and then turning around and using their income to buy all the prod cts from America that are our comparative advantagefrom Corning lass to Microsoft Windowsboth our countries would benefit, even if ome individual Indians or Americans might have to shift jobs in the transi ion.
And one can see evidence of this mutual benefit in the sharp increase n exports and imports between the United States and India in recent years.
ut my eye kept looking at all these Indian zippies and telling me omething else: "Oh, my God, there are so many of them, and they all ook so serious, so eager for work.
And they just keep coming, wave after ave. How in the world can it possibly be good for my daughters and mil ions of other young Americans that these Indians can do the same jobs s they can for a fraction of the wages?"
There was no undersea fiber-optic cable to make knowledge jobs radable between America and India back then.
Just as I was getting orked up with worry, the Infosys spokeswoman accompanying me ca ually mentioned that last year Infosys India received "one million appli ations" from young Indians for nine thousand tech jobs.
Having listened to the arguments on oth sides, though, I come down where the great majority of economists ome downthat Ricardo is still right and that more American individ als will be better off if we don't erect barriers to outsourcing, supplychaining, and offshoring than if we do.
ut the broader argument of this whole section of the book"America nd the Flat World" is that while protectionism would be counter roductive, a policy of free trade, while necessary, is not enough by it elf.
It must be accompanied by a focused domestic strategy aimed at pgrading the education of every American, so that he or she will be ble to compete for the new jobs in a flat world.
And it must be ac ompanied by a foreign strategy of opening restricted markets all over he world (including some of our own, like agriculture), thereby bring ng more countries into the global free-trade systemwhich will in rease demand for goods and services, spur innovation, and reduce oth unemployment and job migration across the globe.
f course, the protectionist/anti-outsourcing school disagrees.
The antioutsourcers argue that in a flat world not only are more goods tradable, ut many services have become tradable as wellthe very service jobs hat support the American middle class but were never exposed to the orces of automation or outsourcing to the degree they are now.
There is no ay that so many new players can enter the global economy, in services nd high-end manufacturingfields long dominated by Americans, uropeans, and Japanesewithout wages settling in at a newer, lower quilibrium.
hat are the main counterarguments from free-trade/outsourcing dvocates, such as myself, who still believe that Ricardo is right?
To suggest that it will be permanent is to invoke  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he so-called lump of labor theorythe notion that there is a fixed lump f labor in the world and that once that lump is gobbled up, whether by mericans or Indians or Japanese, there won't be any more jobs to go round.
If we have the biggest lump of labor now, and then Indians offer o do this same work for less, they will get a bigger piece of the lump, and e will have less, or so this argument goes.
he main reason the lump of labor theory is wrong is that it is based n the assumption that everything that is going to be invented has been nvented, and that therefore economic competition is a zero-sum game,  fight over a fixed lump.
This assumption misses the fact that although obs are often lost in bulkto outsourcing or to offshoring or to new echnologies by big individual companies, and this loss tends to make eadlines, new jobs are also being created in fives, tens, and twenties bysmall companies that you can't see.
The reason t is happening is that as lower-end service and manufacturing jobs move ut of Europe, America, and Japan to India, China, and the former oviet Empire, the global pie not only grows largerbecause more peo le have more income to spend it also grows more complex, as more ew jobs, and new specialties, are created.
Imagine that there are nly two countries in the worldAmerica and China.
Now imagine that the world goes flat and America enters into a ree-trade agreement with China, which has 1,000 people but is a less de eloped country.
So today China too has only 80 well-educated knowl dge workers out of that 1,000, and it has 920 low-skilled workers.
Before merica entered into its free-trade agreement with China, there were nly 80 knowledge workers in its world.
But if you look at the prize they are go ng after, it is now a much expanded and more complex market.
"How do we deal with the act that those eighty knowledge workers from China will be willing to ork for so much less than the eighty knowledge workers from America?
magine how little a North Korean computer expert or brain surgeon is paid nside that huge prison of a nation!
You can already see this happening in Bangalore, here competition for Indian software writers is rapidly pushing up their ages toward American/European levelsafter decades of languishing alaries while the Indian economy was closed.
This is why Americans hould be doing all they can to promote the gradual but sustained opening nd reform of the Indian and Chinese economiesbecause in the long erm overall wages will rise in a more open and productive world economy.
Those American low-skilled workers doing fungible jobsjobs hat can easily be moved to Chinawill have a problem.
They will have to upgrade their education and upgrade heir knowledge skills so that they can occupy one of the new jobs sure to e created in the much expanded United States-China market.
If we go from a world in which there were fifteen drug companies nd fifteen software companies in America (thirty in all) and two drug ompanies and two software companies in China (four in all) to a world n which there are thirty drug and software companies in America and hirty drug and software companies in China, it is going to mean more nnovation, more cures, more niches to specialize in, more new products o customize to individuals or markets, and many more people with igher incomes to buy those products.
The pie keeps growing because things that look like wants today are eeds tomorrow," argued Marc Andreessen, the Netscape cofounder, who elped to ignite a whole new industry, e-commerce, that now employs mil ions of specialists around the world, specialists whose jobs weren't even magined when Bill Clinton became president.
I like going to coffee shops ccasionally, but now that Starbucks is here, I need my coffee, and that ew need has spawned a whole new industry.
I always wanted to be able to earch for things, but once Google was created, I must have my search en ine.
So a whole new industry has been built up around search, and oogle is hiring math Ph.D.'s by the bushelbefore Yahoo!
or Microsoft ires them.
merica integrated a broken Europe and Japan into the global econ-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T my after World War II, with both Europe and Japan every year upgrading heir manufacturing, knowledge, and service skills, often importing and ometimes stealing ideas and equipment from the United States, just as merica did from Britain in the late 1770s.
Yet in the sixty years since orld War II, our standard of living has increased every decade, and our nemployment rate even with all the outcry about outsourcingstands t only a little above 5 percent, roughly half that of the most developed ountries in Western Europe.
By automating these jobs, Opsware en bles companies to save money and free up talented brainpower from elatively mundane tasks to start new businesses in other areas.
You hould be afraid of free markets, argued Andreessen, only if you believe hat you will never need new medicines, new work flow software, new in ustries, new forms of entertainment, new coffeehouses, and only if you elieve that your country's citizens will never be able to develop the nowledge skills to fill the jobs these new industries or business models ill spin off.
Of course, it is true that as Indians and Chinese move up he value chain and start producing more knowledge-intensive goods he sorts of things Americans have specialized in our comparative ad-  M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E antage in some of these areas will diminish, explains Jagdish Bhagwati, he Columbia University expert on free trade.
or instance, there was a time when America's semiconductor industry ominated the world, but then companies from other countries came long and gobbled up the low end of the market.
American companies were then forced to find newer, eeper specialties in the expanded market.
If that weren't happening, Intel ould be out of business today.
Paul Otellini, Intel's resident, told The Economist (May 8, 2003) that as chips become good nough for certain applications, new applications pop up that demand ore powerful and more complex chips, which are Intel's specialty.
s Google, Yahoo!, and Microsoft start offering video searches, for in tance, there will be demand for new devices and the chips that power hem, things most of us couldn't have imagined possible ten years ago.
So exico specialized in making tires and China specialized in making amshafts and America specialized in overall automobile design.
As we ove into the knowledge economy, you are now seeing more and more intraservice trade," with more and more slices of specialization emerg ng within different service sectors as they grow more complex.
Here's how: et's say there are two giant suitcase companies in the world"Tom's uitcases" and "Samsonite."
It can mean millions of dollars in profits if, hen someone searches for "suitcase" on Google, Tom's Suitcases omes up before Samsonite on Google or Microsoft's first page of search esults.
earch engine optimizing has become such a big business that Google ow holds an annual dance party at its headquarters for all the SEOs trying o break its code.
On August 20, 2005, the Associated Press ran a story de cribing the Google Dance: "Free-flowing beer, live music, karaoke and ar ade games kept the party raging at the Googleplex the other night, but the eal action was unfolding inside a sterile conference room at Google Inc. eadquarters.
That's where the cunning Internet entrepreneurs who con tantly try to manipulate Google's search engine results for a competitive dge were trying to make the most of a rare opportunity to match wits faceto-face with the company's top engineers.
Google's code-talking experts, espite putting on a show of being helpful, weren't about to reveal their secret sauce'  Google's tightly guarded formula for ranking Web sites... he efforts to outsmart Google gall some Webmasters such as Shari hurow, who says the best way to increase a site's search engine ranking s to offer valuable content and products."
It is obvious, for in tance, that countries like India and China can now compete in many ore fieldsfields that were once seen as the exclusive preserve of de eloped Western nations.
At the same time, as India and hina develop, they will lose their comparative advantage in certain ower-rung fields, like basic manufacturing or textiles, to places like Viet am or Madagascar.
And, at the same time, there will be an inex rable flow of jobs from the developed world to the developing world, as hese new jobs regularly become commoditized and more easily trad bleand therefore advantageous to do in India or China.
And you ill start to see more innovations emerging from China and India, with ome of the production, design, and marketing being outsourced to the est, where, yes, we still may have some comparative advantage.
But as long as the pie eeps growing and getting more complex, and as long as the individuals n your country keep adding to that pie by imagining new services and roducts in which to specialize, and as long as those individuals keep ducating themselves and developing the skills needed to master these  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ew jobs, workers in India, China, Europe, and America can all do ell at the same time.
lways remember: The Indians and Chinese are not racing us to the bot om.
And the more they do that, the higher they limb, the more room is created at the top because the more they ave, the more they spend, the more diverse product markets become, nd the more niches for specialization are created as well.
Look at what s happening already: As American companies send knowledge work to ndia, Indian companies are turning around and using their earnings nd insights to start inventing new products that poorer Indians can use o lift themselves out of poverty into the middle class, where they will urely become consumers of American products.
Both China and ndia are rapidly developing from a focus on low-cost production and opying to a focus on low-cost innovation of their own.
And once they perfect some of these affordable olutions in their own markets a medical insurance program in India hat covers the poor for as little as $10 a year, cheap laptops, supercheap cell phones, and even a low-fare Indian airline ($75 one-way or the three-hour Bangalore to Delhi flight) that sells tickets from nternet kiosks in gas stationsthey will take them global.
BusinessWeek October 11, 2004) cited the Tata Motors factory, near Pune, south of umbai, "where a group of young designers, technicians, and marketers ore over drawings and examine samples of steel and composite plas ics.
The ompany hopes the car will beat out Suzuki's $5,000 Maruti compact o become India's cheapest carand an export model for the rest of the eveloping world.
'This is the need of the day in India a people's car,' ays Ratan Tata, chairman of the $12.5 billion Tata Group.
Indians are ncreasingly demanding better products and services at an affordable ost.
M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E he phrase 'Made in India' may come to represent innovation in the ew global economy."
aghuram Rajan, the director of research for the International onetary Fund, sits on the board of HeyMath.com, a very innovative ndian education company that puts Indian students to work over the nternet tutoring students in Singapore and elsewhere, and also em loys Indian, British, and Chinese experts to help HeyMath design the est ways to teach various math and science concepts to young people n grades K-12.
In working with public schools in Singapore, and now ven in the United States, HeyMath provides teachers with lesson lans, PowerPoint presentations, online homework packets, and other azzy ways for them to teach math and science.
HeyMath, eadquartered in Chennai, India, is paid for by the schools in Sin apore and elsewhere.
But Cambridge University in England is also art of this equation, providing the overall quality controls and certify ng the lesson plans and teaching methods.
"The company is run by two Indians who orked for Citibank and CSFB in London and came back to India to start his business... Cambridge University is making money from a company hat has created a whole new niche.
The Indian students are making ocket money.
And the Singapore students are learning better."
Mean hile, the underlying software is probably being provided by Microsoft nd the chips by Intel, and the enriched Indian students are probably buy ng cheap personal computers from Apple, Dell, or HP.
n essay in the McKinsey Quarterly, "Beyond Cheap Labor: Lessons or Developing Economies" (January 2005), offers a nice example of ompanies and countries moving from one comparative advantage to nother: "In northern Italy's textile and apparel industry .
the majority f garment production has moved to lower-cost locations, but employ ent remains stable because companies have put more resources into  H E W O R L D IS F L A T asks such as designing clothes and coordinating global production etworks."
t is so easy to demonize free marketsand the freedom to outsource nd offshorebecause it is so much easier to see people being laid off in ig bunches, which makes headlines, than to see them being hired in ives and tens by small and medium-size companies, which rarely makes ews.
My ometown paper, the Minneapolis Star Tribune, did just that.
The article, datelined uxi, China, began like this: "Outside the air is dank, dusty and hot as ropical fever.
In Donaldson's case, the company has twice as any workers in China2,500as the 1,100 it has in Bloomington.
The hinese operation not only has allowed Donaldson to keep making a roduct it no longer could make at a profit in the United States, it also has elped boost the company's Minnesota employment, up by 400 people ince 1990.
Donaldson's highly paid engineers, chemists and designers in innesota spend their days designing updated filters that the Chinese lant will make for use in computers, MP3 players and digital video ecorders.
conomists often compare China's and India's entry into the global conomy to the moment when the railroad lines crossing America fi ally connected New Mexico to California, with its much larger popula ion.
"When the railroad comes to town," noted Vivek Paul, the Wipro resident, "the first thing you see is extra capacity, and all the people in  M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E ew Mexico say those peopleCalifornianswill wipe out all our fac ories along the line.
t happened when we connected New York, New Mexico, and alifornia.
It happened when we connected Western Europe, America, nd Japan.
And it will happen when we connect India and China with merica, Europe, and Japan.
The way to succeed is not by stopping the ailroad line from connecting you, but by firing up your imagination, by pgrading your skills, and by adopting those practices, rules, policies, nd educational institutions that will enable you and your society to laim a healthy slice of the bigger but more complex pie.
But there is no sugar-coating the ew challenge: Every young American today would be wise to think of imself or herself as competing against every young Chinese, Indian, nd Brazilian.
In Globalization 2.0, companies had to think lobally to thrive, or at least survive.
"I think today that people orking in most jobs can sense how what they are doing integrates glob lly: 1 am working with someone in India.
don't care to have that conversation with my girls, so my advice to hem in this flat world is very brief and very blunt: "Girls, when I was rowing up, my parents used to say to me, 'Tom, finish your dinner eople in China and India are starving.'
My advice to you is: Girls, finish our homeworkpeople in China and India are starving for your jobs."
Because the companies that are adjusting best to the flat world are  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ot just making minor changes, they are changing the whole model of the ork they do and how they do itin order to take advantage of the flatworld platform and to compete with others who are doing the same.
This set of issues is what I will explore in this and the next hapter: What kind of good middle-class jobs are successful companies nd entrepreneurs creating today?
In India, untouchables are the lowest social class, but in a lat world everyone should want to be an untouchable.
And remember, as analyst David Rothkopf notes, ost jobs are not lost to outsourcing to India or Chinamost lost jobs re "outsourced to the past."
hat reception job didn't go to India; it went to the past or it went to a icrochip.
As Infosys C E O Nandan Nilekani likes to say, in a flat orld there is "fungible and nonfungible work."
(Princeton University Center for Economic olicy Studies Working Paper No.
This label would apply to Michael Jordan, adonna, Elton John, J. K. Rowling, your brain surgeon, and the top ancer researcher at the National Institutes of Health.
This category in ludes people in many formerly middle-class jobsfrom assembly line ork to data entry to securities analysis to certain forms of accounting nd radiologythat were once deemed nonfungible or nontradable and re now being made quite fungible and tradable thanks to the ten flat eners.
And a lot f the middle class are where that [old] middle is .
They are noticing that the rising threats f a machine or a worker from India taking their jobs have left them with HE UNTOUCHABLES tagnating wages even though they are more productive and their com anies more profitable.
The Financial Times (November 2, 006) explained: "Jack Drake understands better than most Americans ow strongly the U.S. economy has performed over recent years.
His job ith a media company in Atlanta involves transcribing conference calls osted by public companies to deliver financial information to analysts nd investors.
'Almost every day, I listen to chief executives explaining ow well their companies are doing/ he says.
'Healthcare osts are up.
China's olding of about $1 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities and dollars, at very ow interest rates, has kept American interest rates down, enabling many mericans to buy homes with extremely cheap mortgages.
Thanks to lobalization, they can also buy flat-screen TVs, cell phones, computers, hoes, clothing, and cars at ever lower prices.
emocracy cannot be stable without a broad and deep middle class.
We want to enable more American workers to be able to take art in that openness, to derive its benefits and remain part of a flourish ng middle class or move up into it.
Last year, that difference was 5%" (BusinessWeek, February 9, 2007).
herefore, of the many things we need to do, in my view the most im ortant is to identify the new middle jobs that will be less vulnerable to he downward wage pressures of outsourcing, automation, and techno ogical change and to identify the particular skills and education they ill demandso that more weakers can reap the benefits.
I ent out to successful flat-world companies around America and sked a simple question: "Obviously you have a lot of good middle-class obs here.
REAT OLLABORATORS ND O R C H E S T R A T O R S learly, a lot of new middle jobs will involve collaborating with others or rchestrating collaboration within and between companies, especially hose employing diverse workforces from around the world.
So as more nd more companies start out, from day one, as global companies with lobal supply chains, a key new middle job will be that of the manager ho can work in and orchestrate 24/7/7 supply chainswhich are supply hains that run twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, across seven ontinents.
When we arrived at the Infosys headquarters, a spokeswoman ave us a tour of the building.
I always love interacting ith these young Indians.
You have American interns at Infosys?!"
For its one hundred internship positions hat summer, Infosys received about 9,000 applications, primarily from orth America, China, France, and Germany.
I asked one of these interns, icki Chen, a Chinese-American business student from the Claremont olleges in California, why she had sought out an internship in Banga ore. "All the business is coming to India, and I don't see why I shouldn't ollow the business," she said.
s Infosys C E O Nilekani pointed out to me, even though Infosys is ne of the biggest outsourcing firms in the world headquartered in angalore, "30 percent of our employees are outside of India, around the orld"working at the front end, soliciting new business, implement ng new software, and servicing existing accounts.
"Suppose you are working for a big harma company and it starts doing a lot more research in India.
lthough good people skills were always an asset in the working orld, they will be even more so in a flat world, because many more roducts will be made in global supply chains, many new middle jobs ill involve making supply chains more efficient.
"The more complex he globalized networks," says Carlota Perez, a Venezuelan-born expert n technology and socioeconomic development, who is best known for er detailed tracking of large technoeconomic paradigm shifts, "the ore [companies] will need various forms of coordination and manage- HE UNTOUCHABLES ent [around] specifications, compatibility, research and design, global arketing, distribution chains, data sharing and storage, and security."
"We actually have no shortage of ideas," ays John Doerr, the Silicon Valley venture capitalist.
The ost important thing a venture capitalist does, notes Doerr, is find the ight managerial talent to lead and inspire the start-up company so that t can grow to the next level.
HE REAT YNTHESIZERS he further we push out the boundaries of knowledge and innovation, he more the next great value breakthroughsthat is, the next new hotselling products and serviceswill come from putting together disparate hings that you would not think of as going together.
Search engine opti izing, for example, brings together mathematicians and marketing ex erts.
The next great breakthrough in bioscience is going to result from omputer engineers who can map the human genome working with harma companies that can turn these insights into life-saving drugs.
s I write this chapter, one of the hottest new businesses involves what s called "mash-ups," where you just mash together two different Webbased tools.
So, for instance, some local realtors might mash together raigslist with Google, which would mean matching up the local online irectory of everyone selling a house or renting an apartment in a  H E W O R L D IS F L A T articular town with Google's mapsinstantly producing a real estate ap that pinpoints every one of those houses and rental propertiesand s updated every second.
Infosys chief perating officer S. "Kris" Gopalakrishnan asked me one day in Banga ore. "If the value comes from synthesizing, then you need synthesizers.
onventionally your approach to any problem or challenge was breaking t down to manageable bits and smaller parts, but today you are trying to reate value by synthesizing disparate parts together.
And the change that is happening in India and at nfosys is that we are moving more into the capability of creating the syn hesis for the client.
HE REAT XPLAINERS he more we have good synthesizers, who can bring disparate things to ether, the more we will need managers, writers, teachers, producers, ournalists, and editors who are also good explainerswho can see the omplexity but explain it with simplicity.
At he same time, the more content you can search and access, the more im ortant the filters and explainers become.
oward Freeman, fifty-three, owns a custom photography lab in spen, Colorado, called SlideMaster Photo-Imaging.
But thanks to the triple convergence, nd the rise of digital photography, the number of people shooting slide ilm, or any film, dramatically diminished.
He was spend ng all his time explaining to customers or his own employees the fine oints of digital photography and processing.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T o, Freeman recalled, one day he finally said to himself: "Since I am pending half my time explaining digital photography, I might as well ake it half my business."
He and his staff started using the computers not only for pro essing customers' digital photography, but, more important, to start a ew career as explainers.
They invited potential clients to come in during ffice hours or after and learnfor a feehow to do sophisticated digital hoto processing, retouching, and manipulation, using the latest com uter software.
The pure backroom technical person, who does not have ood people skills, might be less in demand.
And the good people person, ho might be just one chapter ahead of the clients in terms of under tanding digital photography, becomes more valuablebecause he or he is a really good explainer.
HE REAT EVERAGERS he man who invented information technology outsourcing is Ross erot, the fast-talkin' Texan who ran for president in 1992.
This came to be known as business process outsourcing, and it as spread from Texas to Bangalore, thanks to the flattening of the world.
DS, which Perot sold in 1984, still does business process outsourcing odaycompeting with companies in India and across the world.
The only way EDS can compete with low-wage India is by having ne person work smarter and faster, rather than cheaper and harder.
The really special r specialized jobs at EDS are held by those people who can leverage echnology, who can design precisely these computer programs that en ble others to work smarter and faster.
he new middle jobs at EDS, for now at least, are held by the people ho learn to operate these new programs.
merica's long-term economic growth and standard of living have ong depended on leveraging technology as a way to compete with heaper foreign labor.
HE REAT DAPTERS he Gartner Group, the technology consultants, coined a term to de cribe the trend in the information technology world away from special zation and toward employees who are more adaptable and versatile.
It alls them "versatilists."
Building employee versatility and finding em loyees who already are or are willing to become versatilists "will be the ew watchword for career planning," according to a Gartner study quoted y TechRepublic.com.
TechRepublic quoted Joe antana, director of training at Siemens Business Services: "With flat or ven smaller budgets and fewer people, managers need to make the most f the people they have .
Those 'Swiss Army knives' are the versatilists."
At the time, EDS was using Novell Netware as its primary net ork operating system.
I picked Windows NT, Microsoft's Network Operating ystem, and I became one of the first NT server technicians in the SMC.
Because to get to the highest job codes you have to publish, ini iate patents, and work on globally important projects."
he core competencies are [just] the entry-level requirements.
ooking down at each rung of the ladder that got her here, Loughry aid, they're all gone: "Every job I have done has to some degree been au omated or is being done [at least in part] by someone in India .
HE REEN EOPLE hen three billion people from China, India, and the former Soviet mpire walk onto the flat-world platform in a very short period of time, nd every one of them wants a house, a car, a microwave, and a refrigera or, if we don't learn how to do more things with less energy and lower missions, we are going to create an environmental disaster and make our lanet unlivable for our children.
As Carlota Perez puts it, "The more hina, India, and other developing or ex-Socialist countries industrialize, he bigger the environmental problems and the larger the market to pre ent, moderate, or overcome them will be."
teve Jurvetson, the venture capitalist and innovator who has focused ecently on the idea of clean tech investing, talks about what he hopes ill be a "biological renaissance"a new era in which college students, nstead of becoming doctors, might instead focus on "bio-derived or bioinspired" solutions to our looming energy and environmental problems.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T HE ASSIONATE ERSONALIZERS nn and I share season tickets to the Baltimore Orioles with friends.
He was providing a localized ser ice that could not be done as well by a machine or a person in India  ecause he was delivering lemonade to my seat so I wouldn't miss a itch.
There is an elderly African-American woman ho serves coffee at the Caribou Coffee outlet near my office on K Street n Washington.
Interestingly, the rinceton economist Alan Blinder argues in his paper on outsourcing hat because so many new middle jobs will require this kind of personal ouch, it may actually produce a revival in human interactive skills, kills that have atrophied to some degree because of the industrial age nd the Internet.
The renewed stress on personally delivered services, y humans, as opposed to impersonally delivered services by computergenerated voices or voices from India, writes Blinder, "may lead to just he opposite of the phenomena that Charlie Chaplin parodied so effec ively in Modern Times.
Human beings are social animals who enjoy hu an contact.
ndeed, adds Blinder, "Perhaps, contrary to what we have come to be ieve in recent years, people skills will become more valuable than com uter skills.
The geeks may not inherit the earth after all."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T ATH OVERS ne by-product of the fact that the PC enables all of us to become au hors of our own content in digital formwhether it is words, spread heets, data, photos, blogs, music, or videois that more and more of hat we design, what we write, what we buy, what we sell, and what we nvent is built on a foundation of math.
It is all about math now," said Infosys C E O Nandan Nilekani.
Whether it is the search engine guys, or the Goldman Sachs guys, verything is boiling down to who can make those complex computa ions to get that little edge, to be just two weeks ahead of everyone else."
Partnerships be ween mathematicians and computer scientists are bulling into whole ew domains of business and imposing the efficiencies of math.
In past decades, the marriage of higher math and com uter modeling transformed science and engineering.
But just look at here the mathematicians are now.
Says James R. Schatz, chief of the math matics research group at the National Security Agency: There has ever been a better time to be a mathematician .
But even with the most powerful computers and abundant, cheap torage, companies can't sort out their swelling oceans of data, much less uild businesses on them, without enlisting skilled mathematicians and omputer scientists.
The rise of mathematics is heating up the job mar et for luminary quants, especially at the Internet powerhouses where ew math grads land with six-figure salaries and rich stock deals.
and Google.'
Top mathematicians are becoming a new global lite.
It's a force of barely 5,000, by some guesstimates, but every bit as owerful as the armies of Harvard University MBAs who shook up corner uites a generation ago .
Researchers at Aetna ealth Care, Amazon.com, and many other companies are piecing to ether mathematical models of customers and employees.
n an essay in Ubiquity, an IT magazine (March 21, 2006), Espen ndersen, associate professor at the Norwegian School of Management, isted all the reasons a young person should want to study math today, but ne in particular stood out to me.
What is exciting and ncouraging about the flattening of the world and innovations like he Business Web is the degree to which they give small business so uch more power and so many more cost savings to innovate and ompete globally.
The localiza ion of the global will be the freelancer who finds a way to use a satellite ish, a DSL line, a BlackBerry, a PC, or some new software to become a ook editor or a film editor or an eBay entrepreneur from his or her bed oom.
It will be the sports bar owner who learns to use multiple satellite eeds on multiple flat-screen TVs to bring twelve NFL games at once, lus a golf tournament in Europe, a basketball game in China, and a soc er match in Australia to his bar patrons on Sunday afternoons.
It will be the small-time entrepreneur ho understands that he can now hire Amazon.com to provide a global ogistics infrastructure to manage his sale of customized bookplates, and ho understands he can go online and find a company in China that ill make those bookplates, and who, therefore, overnight becomes an mporter of bookplates for bookstores, all sold online.
It will be the per-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T on who opens a UPS store and becomes overnight a global supply chain anager for other small businesses.
It will be the local auto repair shop hat suddenly discovers that it can get cheaper BMW hubcaps and ercedes windshield wipers from a supplier in Romania than one in ochester.
inally, it will be people in all sorts of businesses and industries who nderstand the power of "modeling"and I am not talking about Cindy rawford.
ut in the last few years "that started to change," Bill told me, as pub ications and ad agencies moved to digital preparation, relying on the new oftware namely, Quark, Photoshop, and Illustrator, which graphic rtists refer to as "the trinity"which made digital computer design so uch easier.
"Idea ion" was what his clients, including McDonald's and Unilever, wanted.
e stopped using pens and ink and would just do pencil sketches, scan hem into his computer, color them by using the computer's mouse, and hen e-mail them to the client, which would have some less skilled artists inish them.
"They an take my raw sketches and finish them and illustrate them using com uter programs, and it is not like I would do it, but it is good enough," reer said.
Since then e has developed a specialty in the process, and the market for them has xpanded to include Maxim magazine, More, and Nickelodeonone a en's magazine, one a middle-aged women's magazine, and one a kids' agazine.
Morphing used to be one of those really high-end hings you saw on TV, and then they came out with this consumer [soft are] program and people could do it themselves, and I shaped them so agazines could use them.
EVEN he Right Stuff ubas and Test Tubes  friend once asked Isidor I. Rabi, a Nobel Prize winner in physics, how he be ame a scientist.
Rabi replied that every day after school his mother would talk o him about his school day.
At a moment HE RIGHT STUFF ike this one, I feel it would be useful to step back, take a deep breath, and sk: If the strategies detailed in the previous chapter really are going to be he best way for individuals to obtain and retain jobs in the new middle, hen, generally speaking, what is the right kind of education to prepare ur young people for those jobs?
As Princeton economist Alan Blinder erceptively notes, "It is clear that the U.S. and other rich nations will ave to transform their educational systems so as to produce workers for he jobs that will actually exist in their societies .
hat is an ability every worker should cultivate in an age when parts or all f many jobs are constantly going to be exposed to digitization, automa ion, and outsourcing, and where new jobs, and whole new industries, ill be churned up faster and faster.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T n a talk I gave in St. Paul, Minnesota, I made this point, and during he question-and-answer period afterward a young man in the balcony aised his hand, identified himself as a ninth grader, and asked: "Mr. riedman, if it is that important to learn how to learn, how do you learn ow to learn?
n May 2002, I sat with twenty thoughtful young Indonesians in the arden of the Pondok Pesantren Darunnajah, one of Jakarta's finest slamic boarding schools, to ask them for their views of America.
Most Muslims are afraid of America because they think America is gainst Islam," she began.
"You can see that America is backing the sraelians, and the enmity between Islam and Israel, the Jews [and] udaism, is obvious.
It is not that Americans are afraid of Muslims, but hat Muslims are afraid of Americans.
As for the [September 11] tragedy, e can't prove that Muslims did it.
I don't know [what] percent of the Congress are Jewish, but] America is backing Israel, and I think therein lies the feeling of en ity toward America."
"I get most information rom the TV, from the Internet, too .
always think of that young woman as someone who lacked, among ther things, navigation skillsthe ability to sort out truth from fiction in  H E W O R L D IS F L A T his open sewer of information, facts, insights, lies, and half-truths called he World Wide Web.
How many times have you heard someone say, "But  read it on the Internet..." as if that should settle the matter?
n the Indian newspaper Daily News and Analysis (November 5, 005), Sachin Kalbag, the paper's Washington correspondent, wrote the ollowing, which caught my eye: "The Web is undeniably the ultimate torehouse of information, a sort of Encyclopaedia Britannica s Encyclo aedia Britannica.
The challenge for the next generation of arents, educationists and thinkers will, therefore, not be the dissemination f information, but to change the way people differentiate between infor ation and wisdom.
oc Searls, senior editor of the Linux Journal and one of the most re pected technology writers in America, spoke to this point in a review of he first edition of this book (April 28, 2005).
He said: "In the flat new orld, educational opportunities are limitless, even without help from chool, government, churches or business.
But here are plenty of alternatives now, as many as there are individuals with ccess to broadband."
Hilarie Rooney, the principal of Laytonsville Ele entary School in Maryland's Montgomery County, came up to me after  lecture one day and told me that what she looked for in hiring teachers as one simple thing: "whether they loved kids."
And to me that eans a liberal arts education.
Liberal arts is a very horizontal form of ed cation (which is to say, a flat form of education).
But we also need to be vig lant in upholding the teaching of art and music and literature, because hey too are essential for innovation.
I like how Marc Tucker, who heads he National Center on Education and the Economy, puts it: "One thing e know about creativity is that it typically occurs when people who have astered two or more quite different fields use the framework in one to hink afresh about the other.
ne of the best examples of that I can think of is the story that Steve obs, the cofounder of Apple Computer, told about himself in a com encement speech at Stanford University (June 12, 2005):  am honored to be with you today at your commencement from ne of the finest universities in the world.
dropped out of Reed College after the first 6 months, but hen stayed around as a drop-in for another 18 months or so be ore I really quit.
I think one reason America has always been a leader in inno ation of new products and servicesfrom IBMs to iPodsis that our so iety has always valued both technology and liberal arts.
his is a world in which a very high level of preparation in eading, writing, speaking, mathematics, science, literature, his ory and the arts will be an indispensable foundation for every hing that comes after for most members of the workforce.
It is a orld in which comfort with ideas and abstractions is the passport o a good job, in which creativity and innovation are the key to a ood life, in which high levels of educationa very different kind f education than most of us have had are going to be the only ecurity there is.
s I have said, India and China have provided large numbers of their oung people with solid foundations in math and science, and it has been HE  O R L D IS F L A T xtremely important in their rise out of poverty.
But it is no accident that hen you talk to Indian and Chinese businesspeople and even educators, ome now openly express their concerns that if math and science are not eavened by art, literature, music, and the humanities, their countries will e at a competitive disadvantage as they try to get to the next level of lobal competition.
erry Rao, the cofounder of MphasiS, the big Indian outsourcing firm, ut it to me this way: "We have no one going into the liberal arts and veryone going into engineering and MBAs.
We're becoming a nation of spiring programmers and salespeople."
ifty years ago, the Sanskrit scholar was respected in India, Mr. Rao oted, but today it is all about becoming an engineer, a programmer, an BA, or a doctor.
"More people will get Ph.D.'s [in the study of] Sanskrit n America this year than in India," Mr. Rao asserted, "and Sanskrit is the oot of our culture!
If we don't have enough people with the humanities, we will lose the next generation of] V. S. Naipauls and Amartya Sens," he added, refer ing to the Indian-Trinidadian author and the Indian economist, both obel laureates.
In a world upended by outsourcing, eluged with data, and choked with choices, the abilities that atter most are now closer in spirit to the specialties of the right emisphereartistry, empathy, seeing the big picture, and pursu ng the transcendent.
f we want more of our young people to be untouchablesthat is, eople with jobs that "a computer or robot cannot do faster or some tal nted foreigner cannot do cheaper and just as well," we need to focus ed cation on constantly developing our students' right-brain skills"such s forging relationships rather than executing transactions, tackling novel hallenges instead of solving routine problems, and synthesizing the big icture rather than analyzing a single component," argues Pink.
But as the cost of ommunicating with the other side of the globe falls essentially to ero, as India becomes (by 2010) the country with the most nglish speakers in the world, and as developing nations continue o mint millions of extremely capable knowledge workers, the pro essional lives of people in the West will change dramatically.
That's why narrow leftbrain work such as basic computer coding, accounting, legal re earch, and financial analysis is migrating across the oceans.
But hat's also why plenty of opportunities remain for people and com anies doing less routine workprogrammers who can design en ire systems, accountants who serve as life planners, and bankers xpert less in the intricacies of Excel than in the art of the deal.
But they were telling stories, emonstrating empathy, and designing innovations.
It's just hat after a few generations in the Information Age, many of our igh concept, high touch muscles have atrophied.
ut how exactly do you go about nurturing your right-brain skills?
I ave to leave the details to education experts.
If the jobs of the newmiddle require you to be a good collaborator, leverager, adapter, ex lainer, synthesizer, model builder, localizer, or personalizer, and these pproaches require you, among other things, to be able to learn how to earn, to bring curiosity and passion to your work, to play well with others, nd to nurture your right-brain skills, what does that mean specifically for ducation?
I am mpressed by the amount of experimentation I have seen on college cam uses as they try to design the "right education" for the new middle.
I am oing to focus on one schoolGeorgia Institute of Technology, based in tlantato illustrate one thoughtful approach.
As Clough tells it, it was a very cold social and academic nvironmentnot a lot of fun.
Clough realized that only by offering the right education, ot just more education, "would we get more students applying and more tudents graduating."
The idea was that people who have other interests tend to be able to ommunicate, tend to be more social, tend to ask for help more readily hen they need help, tend to help others more who need help, tend to hink horizontally,... tend to be able to tie things together from different isciplines and fields."
We have omputer music synthesizing groups, jazz groups, and virtual and robotic rummers all over the place."
But Clough has reason to boast, be ause my guess is that by making Georgia Tech singand by making other ser-friendly additions to the undergraduate teaching system, and by mak ng education overseas easily available for Georgia Tech studentshe is roducing not just more engineers but more of the right kind of engineers.
People who play instruments or are part of a band have more social killsthey are not just burrowed down in their work," said Clough.
And hat kind of person, he added, has a better chance of synthesizing and or hestrating insights from many different fields.
I am ending that work to India.
Georgia Tech's College of Computing has picked p on these broad themes and has translated them into specific courses.
"Everyone was reading the articles bout all the jobs going to India and China," said Rich DeMillo, the for er HP chief technology officer, who is now dean of the College of omputing.
"The number one question from parents was, 'What will my id do if all the programming jobs go offshore?'"
It became obvious that managing all of this content via omputing, and finding ways to deploy it, from televisions to cell phones o video iPods to Web sites, was going to be a huge growth industry for the ight computer science gradsones who could help tell stories with tech ology.
he nine threads are Computing and Intelligence, Computing and mbodiment, Computing and Internetworking, Computing and Plat orms, Computing and Information, Computing and People, Computing nd Media, Computing and Modeling, and Computing Foundations.
There are almost as many mix-and-match per utations with these threads as there are coffee options at Starbucks.
Imagine," wrote DeMillo in an essay describing his program, "a eorgia Tech undergraduate computer-science student in her sopho ore year interested in computer security.
You ould work on hardware, you could program system software, or you ould work on application algorithms.
So schools had better make sure they re embedding these tools and concepts of collaboration into the educa ion process.
America's ultural willingness to tear things down and rebuild them anew gives us n enormous advantage in the age of flatness, when you are required to ear down and build up more often to achieve innovation and growth.
You [Americans] have all the things you need to get your people from he old middle to the new middle," said Nandan Nilekani of Infosys.
It starts with a network of research universities, which pin off a steady stream of competitive experiments, innovations, and sci ntific breakthroughsfrom mathematics to biology to physics to chem stry.
It is a chaotic system, but it is a great engine f innovation in the world, and with federal tax money, with some phil nthropy on top of that, [it will continue to flourish] .
The BankBoston Economics Depart ent did a study tided "MIT: The Impact of Innovation."
Among its con lusions was that MIT graduates have founded 4,000 companies, creating t least 1.1 million jobs worldwide and generating sales of $232 billion.
hat makes America unique is not that it built MIT, or that its grads re generating economic growth and innovation, but that every state in he country has universities trying to do the same.
"The rest of the world combined has 7,768 nstitutions of higher education.
t has its own Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science and echnology (OCAST), which, on its Web site, describes its mission as fol ows: "In order to compete effectively in the new economy, Oklahoma ust continue to develop a well-educated population; a collaborative, fo used university research and technology base; and a nurturing environ ent for cutting-edge businesses, from the smallest start-up to the largest nternational headquarters... [OCAST promotes] University-Business echnology centers, which may span several schools and businesses,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T esulting in new businesses being spawned, new products being manu actured, and new manufacturing technologies employed."
No wonder hat in 2003, American universities reaped $1.3 billion from patents, ac ording to the Association of University Technology Managers.
oupled with America's unique innovation-generating machines niversities, public and private research labs, and retailerswe have the est-regulated and most efficient capital markets in the world for taking ew ideas and turning them into products and services.
Dick Foster, di ector of McKinsey & Co. and the author of two books on innovation, re arked to me, "We have an 'industrial policy' in the U.S.it is called the tock exchange, whether it is the NYSE or the Nasdaq."
That is where risk apital is collected and assigned to emerging ideas or growing companies, oster said, and no capital market in the world does that better and more fficiently than the American one.
The easy availability of venture capital o fund new products and innovations is a hugely important factor in en bling America to get the most of the flat-world platform.
Because ld traditional companies are rarely early adopters or innovators of the ext great breakthrough technology.
Having lots of venture capital and capitalists around, though, to ake a risk and underwrite the next Google, CNN, or other untested inno ation means that those individuals who want to get the most out of the flatworld platform, who really understand its power to create new products, orms of entertainment, and communities, can do so.
hat makes capital provision work so well in America is the security nd regulation of our capital markets, where minority shareholders are rotected.
hat distinguishes our capital markets is not that Enrons don't happen in mericathey sure do.
It is that when they happen, they usually get ex osed, either by the Securities and Exchange Commission or by the busi ess press, and get corrected.
What makes America unique is not Enron ut Eliot Spitzer, the attorney general of New York State, who has dog edly sought to clean up the securities industry and corporate board ooms.
Said oster, "China and India and other Asian countries will not be successful t innovation until they have successful capital markets, and they will not ave successful capital markets until they have rule of law which protects inority interests under conditions of risk... We in the U.S. are the ucky beneficiaries of centuries of economic experimentation, and we are he experiment that has worked."
Sometimes you have to talk to utsiders to appreciate them, such as Indian-born Vivek Paul of Wipro.
We Americans often forget what an incredibly pen, say-anything-do-anything-start-anything-go-bankrupt-and-startanything-again society the United States is.
he United States also has among the most flexible labor laws in the orld.
This is a great asset, especially when you compare the situa ion in the United States to inflexible, rigidly regulated labor markets like ermany's, full of government restrictions on hiring and firing.
Yes, China has had a good run for the past twenty-five years, and it may ake the transition from communism to a more pluralistic system with ut the wheels coming off.
Together, these norms and institutions create predictability nd confidence and that creates trusta trust that my innovations will be rotected, a trust in my currency, and a trust in my justice system.
And all f that, argued Seidman, propels innovation.
Without trust there is no isk-taking and without risk-taking there is no innovation .
No low-trust society will ever produce sustained innovation.
ndeed, the United States has become one of the great meeting points n the world, a place where lots of different people bond, learn to trust one nother, and build myriad horizontal friendships and alliances.
An In ian student who is educated at the University of Oklahoma and then ets his first job with a software firm in Oklahoma City forges bonds of rust and understanding that are really important for future collaboration, ven if he winds up returning to India.
Nothing illustrates this point bet er than Yale University's outsourcing of research to China.
Yale president ichard C. Levin explained to me that Yale has two big research opera ions running in China today, one at Peking University in Beijing and the ther at Fudan University in Shanghai.
in China; and the other two were postdoctoral fellows in Professor u's Yale lab.
rofessor Xu is a leading expert on genetics and has won grants from he National Institutes of Health and the Howard Hughes Foundation to tudy the connection between genetics and cancer and certain neurode enerative diseases.
So what Yale did was essentially outsource the lab ork to Fudan by creating the Fudan-Yale Biomedical Research Center.
It builds human capital for hina and innovation for Yale."
From an August 17, 2004, AP article from the Athens Olympics titled U.S. Men's Basketball Team Narrowly Beats Greece" hinese pity comes from their belief that we are a country in decline.
James McGregor, a journalist-turned-businessman based in China, and a ormer chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China, riting in The Washington  ost, July 31, 2005 u could find no better metaphor for the way the rest of the world an now compete head-to-head more effectively than ever with merica than the struggles of the U.S. Olympic basketball team n 2004.
The American team, made up of NBA stars, limped home to a HE  O R L D IS F L A T ronze medal after losing to Puerto Rico, Lithuania, and Argentina.
reviously, the United States Olympic basketball team had lost only one ame in the history of the modern Olympics.
Remember when America ent only NCAA stars to the Olympic basketball events?
Because he world keeps learning, the diffusion of knowledge happens faster; oaches in other countries now download American coaching methods ff the Internet and watch NBA games in their own living rooms on satel ite TV.
nd thanks to the triple convergence, there is a lot of new raw talent alking onto the NBA courts from all over the world including many ew stars from China, Latin America, and Eastern Europe.
So the automatic American superiority of twenty ears ago is now gone in Olympic basketball.
If the United tates wants to continue to dominate in Olympic basketball, we must, in hat great sports clich, step it up a notch.
The old standard won't do any ore. As Joel Cawley of IBM remarked to me, "Star for star, the basket all teams from places like Lithuania or Puerto Rico still don't rank well ersus the Americans, but when they play as a teamwhen they collab rate better than we dothey are extremely competitive."
portswriter John Feinstein could have been referring to either merican engineering skills or American basketball skills when he wrote n an August 26, 2004, AOL essay on Olympic basketball that the perfor ance of the U.S. basketball team is a result of "the rise of the interna ional player" and "the decline and fall of the U.S.
And the ecline and fall of the U.S. game, argued Feinstein, is a result of two ong-term trends.
The first is a steady decline "in basketball skills," with merican kids just wanting either to shoot three-point shots or to unk the sort of stuff that gets you on the highlight reel on ESPN's portsCenter instead of learning how to make precise passes, or go into he lane and shoot a pull-up jumper, or snake through big men to get to he basket.
HE QUIET CRISIS oday, said Feinstein, you have an American generation that relies al ost completely on athleticism and almost not at all on basketball skills.
nd there is also that ugly little problem of ambition.
While the rest of he world was getting better in basketball, "more and more NBA players ere yawning at the notion of playing in the Olympics," noted Feinstein.
here is something about post-World War II America that reminds e of the classic wealthy family that by the third generation starts to quander its wealth.
ho needed an education?
But while we were admiring the flat world we had created, a lot f people in India, China, and Eastern Europe were busy figuring out ow to take advantage of it.
Lucky for us, we were the only economy tanding after World War II, and we had no serious competition for forty ears.
That gave us a huge head of steam but also gradually bred a sense f entitlement and a culture of complacency.
hen we got hit with 9/11, it was a once-in-a-generation opportunity to ummon the nation to sacrifice, to address some of its pressing fiscal,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nergy, science, and education shortfallsall the things that we had let lide.
n the previous chapters, I tried to explain why both classic economic heory and the inherent strengths of the American economy leave me con inced that Americans can thrive and claim the jobs of the new middle  rovided we get ready to compete, get every individual to think about how e or she can upgrade his or her educational skills, and keep investing in he secrets of America's sauce.
It is "a quiet crisis," explained Shirley Ann Jackson, the 2004 presi ent of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and resident of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute since 1999.
And this quiet risis involves the steady erosion of America's scientific and engineering ase, which has long been the source of American innovation and our ising standard of living.
is still the leading engine for innovation in the world.
It has the best raduate programs, the best scientific infrastructure, and the capital mar ets to exploit it.
An African-American woman, Jackson was born in Washington,  .
Just when she was getting a chance to go to a better school, the ussians launched Sputnik in 1957, and the U.S. government became bsessed with educating young people to become scientists and engi eers, a trend that was intensified by John F. Kennedy's commitment to  manned space program.
His words, she recalled, "inspired, as isted, and launched many of my generation into science, engineering, nd mathematics," and the breakthroughs and inventions they spawned ent well beyond the space program.
hanks in part to desegregation, both Jackson's inspiration and intel ect were recognized early, and she ultimately became the first AfricanAmerican woman to earn a Ph.D. in physics from MIT (her degree was n theoretical elementary particle physics).
From there, she spent many ears working for AT&T Bell Laboratories, and in 1995 was appointed by resident Clinton to chair the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
They are emographic, political, economic, cultural, even social."
"For the first time in more han a century, the United States could well find itself falling behind ther countries in the capacity for scientific discovery, innovation, and conomic development."
But after three centuries of tech ological and scientific advances, subsistence is no longer the norm.
team power, machine tools, electricity, and ultimately computers and he Internet have enabled individuals to become vastly more productive.
As these tools have become commodities, widely dispersed to every ne, business strategist John Hagel III noted, the "only sustainable edge" or companies and countries is the distinctive talents and entrepreneurship of their workforce.
hat is why I insist that wealth in the age offlatnesswill increasingly HE UIET CRISIS ravitate to those countries who get three basic things right: the infra tructure to connect as efficiently and speedily as possible with the flat orld platform, the right education programs and knowledge skills to em ower more of their people to innovate and do value-added work on that latform, and,finally,the right governancethat is, the right tax policies, he right investment and trade laws, the right support for research, the ight intellectual property laws, and, most of all, the right inspirational eadershipto enhance and manage the flow with the flat world.
nfortunately, the United States has serious gaps developing in all of hese areas.
In the Cold War, one of the deepest concerns of American ociety was the putative missile gap between us and the Soviet Union, hich threatened America from outside.
Today we should be con erned about the gaps in our education, infrastructure, and ambitions hat threaten to weaken us from within.
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #1: THE NUMBERS GAP  rty little secret number one is that the generation of scientists and ngineers who were motivated to go into science by the threat of putnik in 1957 and the inspiration of JFK are reaching their retirement ears and are not being replaced in the numbers that they must be if an dvanced economy like that of the United States is to remain at the head f the pack.
An analysis of NASA records con ucted by the newspaper Florida Today (March 7, 2004), which covers he Kennedy Space Center, showed the following: Nearly 40 percent of he 18,146 people at NASA are age fifty or older.
The National Commission on Mathematics and Science eaching for the Twenty-first Century, chaired by the former astronaut nd senator John Glenn, found that two-thirds of the nation's mathemat cs and science teaching force will retire by 2010. raditionally we made up for any shortages of engineers and science aculty by educating more at home and importing more from abroad.
very two years the National Science Board supervises the collection f a very broad set of data trends in science and technology in the United tates, which it publishes as Science and Engineering Indicators.
It said HE QUIET CRISIS hat of the 2.8 million first university degrees (what we call bachelor's de rees) in science and engineering granted worldwide in 2003, 1.2 mil ion were earned by Asian students in Asian universities, 830,000 were ranted in Europe, and 400,000 in the United States.
In engineering pecifically, universities in Asian countries now produce eight times as any bachelor's degrees as the United States.
Science and engi eering degrees now represent 60 percent of all bachelor's degrees arned in China, 33 percent in South Korea, 41 percent in Taiwan  nd roughly 31 percent in the United States.
The United States has al ays depended on the inventiveness of its people in order to compete in he world marketplace, said the NSB.
research and education institutions to regenerate has been dam ged and that their preeminence has been lost to other areas of the orld," the science board said.
he 2002 NSB indicators showed that the number of science and engi eering Ph.D.'s awarded in the United States dropped from twenty-nine housand in 1998 to twenty-seven thousand in 1999.
The total number f engineering undergraduates in America fell about 12 percent between he mid-1980s and 1998. evertheless, America's science and engineering labor force grew at a ate well above that of America's production of science and engineering egrees, because a large number of foreign-born S&E graduates migrated o the United States.
The NSB said that persons born outside the United States ac ounted for 14 percent of all S&E occupations in 1990.
They can now do world-class work for world-class companies at ery decent wages at home.
As Allan E. Goodman, president of the nstitute of International Education, put it, "When the world was round, hey could not go back home, because there was no lab to go back to and o Internet to connect to.
s the NSB study noted, "Since the 1980s other countries have in reased investment in S&E education and the S&E workforce at higher ates than the United States has.
Between 1993 and 1997, the O E C D ountries [Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development,  group of forty nations with highly developed market economies] in reased their number of S&E research jobs 23 percent, more than twice he 11 percent increase in S&E research jobs in the United States."
No wonder New York Times education writer Sam illon reported on December 21, 2004, that "foreign applications to merican graduate schools declined 28 percent this year.
Enrollments of all for ign students, in undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral programs, fell or the first time in three decades in an annual census released this fall.
ome analysts have argued that it can be very misleading to quote the ross number of engineers graduating every year in India, China, and the nited Statesand therefore conclude that America must be falling ehindbecause accurate statistics are not only hard to come by, they of en ignore the different quality of engineering degrees in the respective ountries.
For instance, a December 2005 study by Duke University's  H E W O R L D IS F L A T aster of Engineering Management Program, entitled "Framing the ngineering Outsourcing Debate: Placing the United States on a Level laying Field with China and India," concluded that the Indian and hinese numbers often include graduates from less rigorous two- or hree-year training programswhile the U.S. numbers usually capture nly accredited four-year bachelor degree programs.
These dynamic engineers usu lly come out of at least four-year, accredited engineering programs, and heir jobs are not easily outsourced.
America, the Duke study con luded, is still producing a relatively high proportion of dynamic engi eers and computer scientists compared to India and China, and herefore remains very competitive.
Second, yes, the average engineering egree in India or China today may not be the same quality as at the aver ge accredited four-year American university.
But let me put this in very imple language: There are many more Indians and Chinese than there re Americans and a much, much higher percentage of them are studying cience, computer science, and engineeringin their home countries nd in American universities.
So I ave no doubt that within the next twenty years the average quality of un ergraduate engineering degrees in China and India will start to mirror the merican average.
Consider the annual worldwide Intel International Science and ngineering Fair.
In 2004, the Intel Fair attracted around ixty-five thousand American kids, according to Intel.
I asked Wee Theng Tan, the president of Intel China, during a isit to Beijing.
In China, he told me, there is a national affiliate science air, which acts as a feeder system to select kids for the global Intel fair.
Those selected to go to the international [Intel] fair re immediately exempted from college entrance exams," and basically et their choice of any top university in China.
In the 2004 Intel Science air, China came home with thirty-five awards, more than any other ountry in Asia, including one of the top three global awards.
o wonder that Education Week, which is read by teachers all over merica, ran an article (July 28, 2004) with the headline "Immigrants' hildren Inhabit the Top Ranks of Math, Science Meets."
It said: "Re earch conducted by the National Foundation for American Policy hows that 60 percent of the nation's top science students and 65 percent f the top mathematics students are children of recent immigrants, ac ording to an analysis of award winners in three scholastic competi ions .
the Intel Science Talent Search, the U.S. team for the nternational Mathematical Olympiad, and the U.S. Physics Team."
he study's author, Stuart Anderson, attributed the immigrant students' uccess "partly to their parents' insistence that they manage study time isely," Education Week said.
A strong percent ge of the students surveyed had parents who arrived in the United States n H-1B visas, reserved for professional workers.
The article quoted Andrei Munteanu, eighteen, a finalist for the 2004 Intel competition, whose parents ad moved from Romania to the United States five years earlier.
unteanu started American public school in the seventh grade and found t a breeze compared to his Romanian school.
"The math and science lasses [covered the same subject matter] I was taking in Romania... hen I was in fourth grade," he said.
Every four years the United tates takes part in the Trends in International Mathematics and Science tudy, which assesses students after fourth grade and eighth grade.
ltogether, the most recent study involved roughly a half million stu ents from forty-one countries and the use of thirty languages, making it he largest and most comprehensive international study of education hat has ever been undertaken.
The Associated Press reported (December 4, 2004) that merican eighth graders had improved their scores in science and math ince 1995, when the test first was given, but their math improvement ame mainly between 1995 and 1999, and not in recent years.
The rising cores of American eighth graders in science were an improvement over 999 and lifted the United States to a higher ranking relative to other ountries.
As a result, the United States slipped in the interna ional rankings as other countries made gains.
"As one example, 44 percent of eighth-graders in Singapore HE QUIET CRISIS cored at the most advanced level in math, as did 38 percent in Taiwan.
nly 7 percent in the United States did."
Results from another interna ional education test also came out in December 2004, from the Pro ram for International Student Assessment.
hat may be partly explained by a 2005 study by the National Academy f Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of edicine titled "Rising Above the Gathering Storm."
Stern and I immediately fell into conversation about he state of science education in America today.
In that vein, he argued, it is crazy to see public HE QUIET CRISIS chools getting rid of art and music programs.
"I was a serious classical musician, which definitely teaches hard orkand, for that matter, hard work all on your own, not like practic ng with a sports team.
What worries him, he added, is here is the innovation going to happen?
Are we going to be trading our stuff, or China's stuff?"
On December 16, 2005, The New ork Times carried a story reporting that the average American college raduate's literacy in English had declined significantly over the past ecade, according to a widely respected nationwide test.
"The National Assessment of Adult Literacy, given n 2003 by the Department of Education, is the nation's most important est of how well adult Americans can read," the Times said.
"The test also ound steep declines in the English literacy of Hispanics in the United tates, and significant increases among blacks and Asians.
There were 26.4 million college graduates... Grover J. hitehurst, director of an institute within the Department of Education hat helped to oversee the test, said he believed that the literacy of college raduates had dropped because a rising number of young Americans in ecent years had spent their free time watching television and surfing the nternet.
'We're seeing substantial declines in reading for pleasure, and t's showing up in our literacy levels,' he said."
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #3: THE AMBITION AP  A u r love of television and video and online games helps to explain  y o u r third dirty little secret, one that several prominent American EOs would tell me only in a whisper.
When ou take a low-wage, low-prestige job in America, like a call center oper tor, and bring it over to India, where it becomes a high-wage, highprestige job, you end up with workers who are paid less but motivated ore. "The dirty little secret is that not only is [outsourcing] cheaper and fficient," the American C E O of a London-headquartered multinational old me, "but the quality and productivity [boost] is huge."
In addition to he wage compression, he said, one Bangalore Indian employee will do he work of two or three Europeans, and the Bangalore employees don't ake six weeks of holidays.
short time after returning from India, I was approached in an air ort by a young man who wanted to talk about some columns I had writ en from there.
We had a nice chat, I asked him for his card, and we truck up an e-mail friendship.
When I asked him what we needed to do merica to get our edge back, he sent me this e-mail:  taught at a local university.
As you well know, India's biggest advantage over the hinese and Russians is that they speak English.
But it would be rong to assume the top Indian developers are better than their merican counterparts.
The Indians that I work ith are the cream of the crop.
They are educated by the equiva ents of MIT back in India and there are plenty of them.
If you ere to follow me in my daily meetings it would become very ob ious that a great deal of my time is spent working with Indians.
But technologies, such as Linux, are allowing them to tart taking higher-paying system design jobs that had previously een the exclusive domain of American workers.
The only two areas that I have not seen Indian labor n are networking architects and system architects, but it is only a atter of time.
Indians are very bright and they are quickly learn ng from their interaction with system architects just how all of the ieces of the IT puzzle fit together .
Were Congress to pass leg slation to stop the flow of Indian labor, you would have major oftware systems that would have nobody who knew what was go ng on.
Low education means ow-paying jobs, plain and simple, and this is where more and ore Americans are finding themselves.
In the summer of 005, I received the following letter from Malcolm Davidson, a high chool teacher in Washington State: ear Mr. Friedman, I teach fifth grade reading and social studies at he Annie Wright School, a private school in Tacoma, Washington.
hile many of the families I teach are ethnically diverse and well ducated, most are white, upper middle class American families.
(Guess here the Vora family immigrated from?)
In n academic sense we lost our hunger (except for cheerleading nd football and failing bond measures).
Sadly, national leadership is worried about not eaving kids behind, and states like Kansas and Georgia seem more oncerned with eliminating Darwin and adding intelligent design.
ssentially, before the world started getting flattened, the United tates was an islandan island of innovation and safety and growing ncomes.
In the winter of 20041 had tea n Tokyo with Richard C. Koo, chief economist for the Nomura Research nstitute.
They try to tap the energy, entrepreneurship, creativity, and intelligence of their own peoplemen and omenrather than drill an oil well.
Taiwan is a barren rock in a typhoonladen sea, with virtually no natural resourcesnothing but the energy, mbition, and talent of its own peopleand today it has the third-largest inancial reserves in the world.
The success of Hong Kong, Japan, South orea, and coastal China can all be traced to a similar flatness.
I am a Taiwanese American with a father from Taiwan and with a apanese mother," Koo told me.
"I was born in Japan and went to Japa ese elementary school and then moved to the States.
There is a saying n China that whatever you put in your head and your stomach, no one an take away from you.
From Wroclaw, Poland (July 23, 2004), Pearlstein rote: "A curtain has descended across Europe.
"The energy and sense of possibility are almost palpable here .
oney and companies are pouring in not just the prestige nameplates ike Bombardier, Siemens, Whirlpool, Toyota and Volvo, but also the etwork of suppliers that inevitably follows them.
It's also the attitude of workers who take pride and are willing to do hat is necessary to succeed, even if it means outsourcing parts produc ion or working on weekends or altering vacation schedulesthings that ould almost certainly trigger months of acrimony and negotiation in estern Europe.
'The people back home, they haven't got any idea how uch they need to change if they want to preserve what they have,' said os Ugarte [a Basque who heads the appliance manufacturing opera ions of Mondragon, the giant Spanish industrial cooperative].
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #4: HE E D U C A T I O N GAP A TT H E B O T T O M   you look back to America in the first third of the last century, you will ind the roots of the public education system we have todaya system hat is now outmoded for a flat world.
Back in the early twentieth century, merica decided to organize its education system by delegating the power nd responsibility for education to local school boards.
We basically al owed each community to organize its own school system, with its own ap roach to teaching and textbooks, and its own salary structuresas pposed to doing it either on a national level, as most countries do, or on  state level as, say, Germany does.
The net effect of this approach, argues arc Tucker, president of the National Center on Education and the conomy, was a patchwork system in which we delegated education  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ower to local school boards "organized by wealth."
And in those communities you also had very igh social noise and low expectations.
his was greatly reinforced by the advent of home mortgage subsidies nd the highway construction subsidies after World War II, noted Tucker, hich combined to create the suburbs as we know them.
All these postwar develop ents combined to create large metropolitan areas in the United States urrounded by suburbs that can be arrayed along a finely graded scale of ace and class, in most cases with matching school districts.
mericans have always wanted and expected their public schools to e the agent of social mobility, the principal means by which poor eople can lift themselves up by their bootstraps to grab the American rass ring.
So f you went to an elite private school or a public school in a wealthy neigh orhood, you got an education that reinforced innovation and creativity, hile the worst public high schools focused on just getting kids through ith the bread-and-butter basics.
There are fewer and ewer decent jobs for those without a lot of knowledge.
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #5: THE FUNDING GAP  r now, the United States still excels at teaching science and engi eering at the graduate level, and also in university-based research.
ut as the Chinese get more feeder stock coming up through their im roving high schools and universities, "they will get to the same level as s after a decade," said Intel chairman Craig Barrett.
"We are not gradu ting the volume, we do not have a lock on the infrastructure, we do not ave a lock on the new ideas, and we are either flat-lining, or in real dol ars cutting back, our investments in physical science."
ontinued American technological leadership in building the jobs of  H E W O R L D IS F L A T omorrow, added Barrett, requires "a commitment to basic research fund ng today."
Unfortunately, the 2004 Task Force on the Future of American nnovation found that federal funding for research in physical and mathe atical sciences and engineering, as a share of GDP, actually declined by 7 percent between 1970 and 2004.
In the fiscal year 2005 budget passed y the Republican-led Congress in November 2004, the budget for the ational Science Foundation, which is the federal body most responsible or promoting research and funding more and better science education, as actually cut by 1.9 percent, or $105 million.
The Department of Energy's Office of Science, the ost important funder of physics research in America, got only a 2.9 per ent increase in fiscal 2005 and a 0.9 percent boost in 2006, which mounts to a budget cut after inflation.
he October 2005 National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of ngineering, and Institute of Medicine report, "Rising Above the athering Storm," which was put together by a blue-ribbon panel of sci ntists and entrepreneurs, concluded that for America to be prepared for he twenty-first century, it must increase federal investment in such re earch by 10 percent a year over the next seven years.
epublican congressman Vern Ehlers of Michigan, a voice in the wilder ess, said the following, after Congress cut the NSF's 2005 budget: While I understand the need to make hard choices in the face of fiscal onstraint, I do not see the wisdom in putting science funding behind ther priorities .
This decision shows dangerous disregard for our nation's uture, and I am both concerned and astonished that we would make this HE UIET CRISIS ecision at a time when other nations continue to surpass our students in ath and science and consistently increase their funding of basic re earch.
The percentage of American papers pub ished in the top physics journal, Physical Review, has fallen from 61 per ent to 29 percent since 1983.
From 1980 to 2003, Japan's share of orld industrial patents rose from 12 percent to 21 percent, and Taiwan's rom 0 percent to 3 percent.
By contrast, the U.S. share of patents has allen from 60 percent to 52 percent since 1980. ongress has a long history of wasting money on pork barrel highway rojects.
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #6: HE INFRASTRUCTURE GAP  omas Bleha, a former U.S. foreign service officer who was based in apan, wrote a telling article for Foreign Affairs (May-June 2005) hat began like this: "In the first three years of the Bush Administration, he United States dropped from 4th to 13th place in the global rankings f broadband Internet usage.
Today, most U.S. homes can access only basic' broadband, among the slowest, most expensive, and least reliable n the developed world, and the United States has fallen even further be ind in mobile-phone-based Internet access.
In fact, the United States is the only industrialized state ithout an explicit national policy for promoting broadband."
ince it took over in 2001, the Bush team has made clear that its prior-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ties are tax cuts, missile defense, and the war on terrorismnot keeping he United States at the forefront of Internet innovation.
ccording to the data released in April 2005 by the International Tele ommunication Union (ITU), Americas global broadband penetration ropped from thirteenth place to sixteenth.
The ITU ranked the United tates at 11.4 broadband subscribers per 100 inhabitants as of December 1, 2004, which is less than half that of South Koreathe most wired ountry in the worldwith 24.9 broadband subscribers per 100 inhabi ants.
"Norway, Israel and Finland each surpassed the United States in roadband penetration for thefirsttime," the National Journal reported on pril 25, 2005.
"And an aggressive rollout in France almost pushed the .S.
High-speed Internet use in France doubled from 5.61 ubscribers per 100 inhabitants at the end of 2003 to 11.2 per 100 last year, utting the nation at 17th, just one notch below the United States."
n the current administration's first three years, noted Bleha, President eorge W. Bush mentioned broadband just twice and only in passing.
Not nly that, but what the United States measures as broadband service200 bps-"wouldn't cut the mustard in much of the rest of the world," noted ark Lloyd, writing in the daily Progress Report for the Center for merican Progress (October 7, 2004).
In Japan, for instance, consumers ay the equivalent of $10 a month for service forty times as fast as 200 Kbps.
he smartest countries, and cities, in the world are offering their residents ot just the fastest broadband, but at the lowest prices to the widest areas.
roadband and information technologies are important not only be ause they are big global businesses in and of themselves, but also ecause they are critical to advancing productivity and innovation in very sector in the economy.
The more you connect an educated popu ation to the flat-world platform in an easy and affordable way, the more hings they can automate, and therefore the more time and energy they ave to innovate.
f the flat-world platform makes innovation and production so much HE UIET CRISIS ore efficient, "but your people can't take advantage of it, because they on't have the infrastructure or the education to do so," remarked Craig undie of Microsoft, "then sooner or later you are going to get hosed."
HE OTTOM INE  en I asked Bill Gates about the supposed American education dvantagean education that stresses creativity, not rote learninghe was utterly dismissive.
In his view, the people who think that the more ote-oriented learning systems of China and Japan can't turn out innova ors who can compete with Americans are sadly mistaken.
Who has the most creative video games in the world?
Japan!
ne cannot stress enough: Young Chinese, Indians, and Poles are ot racing us to the bottom.
They want to domi ate usin the sense that they want to be creating the companies of the uture, ones that people all over the world will admire and clamor to ork for.
was talking to a Chinese American who worked for Microsoft and had ccompanied Bill Gates on visits to China.
He said Gates is recognized verywhere he goes in China.
Young people there hang from the rafters nd scalp tickets just to hear him speak.
Same with Jerry Yang, the cofounder of Yahoo!
n China today, Bill Gates is Britney Spears.
Johns Hopkins University president Bill Brody re arked to me, "Over 60 percent of our graduate students in the sciences at Hopkins] are foreign students, and mostly from Asia.
At one point four ears ago all of our graduate students in mathematics were from the PRC Communist China].
here is an old techie adage that in places like China and Japan the ail that stands up gets hammered, while in Silicon Valley the nail that tands up drives a Ferrari and has stock options.
n October 2005, on a visit to Beijing, I interviewed Wu Qidi, China's ice minister of education.
And China is changing, particularly as more and ore young Chinese are educated in America and Europe.
nd now we are seeing that the world is changing and the Internet is hanging our world so fast...
China is focused on overcoming its weaknessesbeginning ith creative thinkingto match our strengths.
t will take time, probably longer than China thinks.
But when one ooks at what China has been doing at the very top, I have no doubt that t will get where it wants to go.
Let me take you for a little tour of Micro oft Research Asia, the research center that Bill Gates set up in Beijing to raw on Chinese brainpower.
Microsoft has four major research centers n the world: in Cambridge, England; in Redmond, Washington, its eadquarters; in Beijing; and most recently in Bangalore, India.
Bill ates told me that within just a couple of years of its opening in 1998, icrosoft Research Asia had become the most productive research arm n the Microsoft system "in terms of the quality of the ideas that they are urning out.
n China, where there are 1.3 billion people and the universities are ust starting to crack the top ranks, the competition for top spots is fero ious.
The math/science salmon that swims upstream in China and gets tself admitted to a top Chinese university or hired by a foreign company s one smart fish.
The folks at Microsoft have a saying about their re earch center in Beijing, which, for scientists and engineers, is one of the ost desirable places to work in all of China.
"Remember, in China hen you are one in a millionthere are thirteen hundred other people ust like you."
n other words, the brainpower that rises to the Microsoft research enter in Beijing is already one in a million.
ai-Fu Lee, who has since left Microsoft, was originally assigned to uild the Microsoft research center in Beijing.
Lee said his team went o universities all over China and simply administered math, IQ, and rogramming tests to Ph.D.-level students or scientists.
They were given two-year contracts and told hat at the end of two years, depending on the quality of their work, they ould either be given a longer-term contract or granted a postdoctoral de ree by Microsoft Research Asia.
The Chinese gov rnment gave Microsoft the right to grant postdocs.
A lot of students want to go to Stanford or IT, but they want to spend two years at Microsoftfirst,as interns, so they an get a nice recommendation letter that says these are MIT quality."
hey view this as "a once-in-a-lifetime income opportunity," said Lee f the team at Microsoft Research Asia.
They work through holidays, because heir dream is to get to Microsoft."
Lee, who had worked for other Ameri an high-tech firms before coming to Microsoft, said that until starting icrosoft Research Asia, he had never seen a research lab with the en husiasm of a start-up company.
Harry Shum, the HE QUIET CRISIS arnegie Mellon-trained engineer who now runs Microsoft Research Asia, as a very clear view of what Chinese innovators can do when given the right nvironment.
ACM Siggraph is the premier global conference for computer raphics and interactive technologies.
At Siggraph 2005, a total of ninetyeight papers were published from universities and research institutes all over he world.
Nine of themalmost 10 percentcame from Microsoft's eijing office alone, beating out MIT and Stanford.
n addition, Microsoft Research Asia has already contributed more han one hundred new technologies for current Microsoft products  rom Xbox to Windows.
It's a huge leap in seven years, but, outside of othouses like Microsoft, China still has a way to go.
A Chinese journalist once asked me, 'Harry, tell me honestly, what s the difference between China and the U.S.?
How far is China behind?'
joked, 'Well, you know, the difference between China high tech and merican high tech is only three months if you don't count creativity.'
hen I was a student in China twenty years ago we didn't even know hat was happening in the U.S. Now, any time an MIT guy puts up omething on the Internet, students in China can absorb it in three onths.
So very soon, in ten or twenty years, ou will see a flood of top-quality research papers from China."
nce more original ideas start emerging here, though, China will till need more venture capital and the rule of law to get them to market.
But with venture capital coming into this country, it will definitely nspire a new generation of Chinese entrepreneurs.
I will be teaching a  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lass at Tsinghua University next year on how to do technology-based entures .
She said the researchers get them rom Microsoft every time they invent "something that gets patented."
December 15, 2004, the Council on Competitiveness hosted a ational Innovation Initiative Summit at the Ronald Reagan uilding in Washington, D.C., to release its long-term study "Innovate merica: Thriving in a World of Challenge and Change"a detailed ipartisan analysis by America's leading technologists and industrialists bout how to re-energize American competitiveness through more re earch, education, and innovation.
Several months after the report came ut, the Council on Competitiveness was contacted by the Chinese em assy in Washington and told that China's vice minister of science and echnology would be visiting and would like to invite council members for  lunch.
Deborah Wince-Smith, the energetic president of the Council on ompetitiveness, told me that her colleagues were happy to share their eport with the Chinese visitor, as they had with other foreign delega ions.
Wince-Smith said these ays she is wondering "whether we are going to implement [the Innovate merica report] or China is going to beat us to our own plan."
He was holding his own economic ummit, speaking to a carefully selected audience that included many epublican campaign donors, to push his ultimately failed plan to partially rivatize Social Security.
And down the hall, a bipartisan group headed by Sam Palmisano, EO of IBM, and G. Wayne Clough, president of Georgia Tech, was of ering up just such a New New Deal agenda at a National Innovation ummit and the president could not devote five minutes to it.
short while later I spoke with Craig Barrett, the Intel chairman, ho seemed exasperated that Washington, including both political par ies, didn't seem to really grasp this quiet crisis or at least not with the rgency that was required.
But if you look at here Intel is making a lot of its new engineering-level investments, he dded, it's in four or five countriesRussia, China, and India and to a esser extent Malaysia and Israel.
These and other emerging markets are lso where Intel is selling more and more of its chips.
hen Barrett added something about Intel that is so true in a flat orld, but nevertheless shocking to many Americans.
Intel, he said, can hrive as a company "even if we never hire another American."
He was  H E W O R L D IS F L A T uick to add that this is not Intel's intent or desire.
Remember, said Tracy Koon, Intel's irector of corporate affairs, Intel's chips are made from just two things and and brains (silicon comes from sand) "and right now the brains re the problem .
I am not alking about data programmers or [people with] B.S.
e have just started a whole engineering function in Russia, where en ineers have wonderful trainingand talk about underemployed!
hat is Shirley Ann Jackson's perfect stormwe don't let the talent n from abroad as much as we used to, the growing opportunities for our est companies shift more and more to foreign markets, and we don't do  better job educating our own kids to fill the gaps.
If that storm comes to ass, American companies, like Intel, will just lift off American soil like ocket ships.
We will think of them as merican companies, because they will be listed on the New York Stock xchange and have post office boxes here, but they really will be flatworld companies.
Where innovation happens really does matter, be ause that is where the best jobs are going to be located, and those best obs spin off more good jobs and decent jobs in every community.
It mat ers that Microsoft is headquartered in Redmond, Washington.
It matters hat Google is headquartered in Mountain View, California.
Standard of living is related to the average value add of your work orce," said Barrett, "and that is related to average educational level of your orkforce.
If you downgrade the average educational level of your work orce, relative to your competition, your standard of living will decline."
ook at the high-profile attention Congress has devoted to steroids in ajor-league baseball, Barrett said, and compare that with the attention it HE QUIET CRISIS as focused on the crisis in science education in major-league American ities.
Almost immediately after the scandal broke.
As my wife likes to tell me," said Barrett, "when you study history and ook at every civilization that has grown up and died off, they all leave one emnanta major sports coliseum at the heart of their capital."
Therefore, we should be embarking immediately on n all-hands-on-deck, no-holds-barred, no-budget-too-large crash program or science and engineering education.
So let us from this moment begin our work so that in the fu ure men will look back and say: It was then, after a long and weary way, that an turned the exploits of his genius to the full enrichment of his life.
Lyndon B. Johnson, "Great Society" speech, 1964 ost politicians here don't know the difference between a server and a waiter.
hat's why kids in South Korea have better Internet access than kids in the south ronx.
Andrew Rasiej, candidate in 2005 for New York City's office of ublic advocate, trying to run on a platform focused on upgrading New York ity's IT infrastructure (he was not elected)   a person who grew up during the Cold War, I'll always remem er driving along down the highway and listening to the radio, hen suddenly the music would stop and a grim-voiced an ouncer would come on the air and say, "This is a test of the Emergency roadcast System," and then there would be a thirty-second high-pitched iren sound.
hat, however, is exactly what I want to say here: This is not a test he long-term opportunities and challenges that the flattening of the orld puts before the United States are profound.
"For a country as wealthy as we are, it is amazing how little we re doing to enhance our natural competitiveness," said Dinakar Singh, he Indian-American hedge fund manager.
f this moment has any parallel in American history, it is the height of he Cold War, around 1957, when the Soviet Union leaped ahead of merica in the space race by putting up the Sputnik satellite.
The ain challenge in that world was from those practicing extreme ommunismnamely, Russia, China, and North Korea.
The main chal enge to America today is from those practicing extreme capitalism  amely, China, India, and South Korea.
hat this era has in common with the Cold War era, though, is that eeting the challenges of flatism requires as comprehensive, energetic, nd focused a response as did meeting the challenge of communism.
It equires our own version of the New Frontier and Great Society adapted o the age offlatness.It requires a president who can summon the nation o get smarter and study harder in science, math, and engineering in or er to reach the new frontiers of knowledge that the flat world is rapidly pening up and pushing out.
And it requires a Great Society that com-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T its our government to building the infrastructure, safety nets, and insti utions that will help every American become more employable in an ge when no one can be guaranteed lifetime employment.
etting Americans to rally around compassionate flatism is much more ifficult than getting them to rally around anticommunism.
In the Cold War, e actually got to see the Soviets parade their missiles in Red Square.
We ll got to be scared together, from one end of the country to the other, nd all our politicians had to be focused and serious about marshaling he resources and educational programs to make sure Americans could eep pace with the Soviet Union.
ut today, alas, there is no missile threat coming from India.
No, that voice has none of he menace of Nikita Khrushchev pounding a shoe on the table at the N, and it has none of the sinister snarl of the bad guys in From Russia ith Love.
There is no Boris or Natasha saying, "We will bury you" in a hick Russian accent.
At that ime, America was recovering from the twin shocks of Sputnik and the oviet space launch of a cosmonaut, Yuri Gagarin, less than two months efore Kennedy's speech.
"But the facts of the matter are that we have never ade the national decisions or marshaled the national resources re uired for such leadership.
After then laying out his whole program for utting a man on the moon within ten years, President Kennedy added, Let it be clear that I am asking the Congress and the country to accept  firm commitment to a new course of action, a course which will last for any years and carry very heavy costs.. .
n that speech, Kennedy made a vow that has amazing resonance oday: "I am therefore transmitting to the Congress a new Manpower evelopment and Training program, to train or retrain several hundred housand workers, particularly in those areas where we have seen chronic nemployment as a result of technological factors, in new occupational kills over a four-year periodin order to replace those skills made obso ete by automation and industrial change with the new skills which the ew processes demand."
No one is immune not me, not you, ot Microsoft.
It is to mbrace globalization and understand that a fairer, more compassion te, and more egalitarian society lies in a web of policies aimed not at trengthening the old welfare state or in abolishing it and just letting he market rip but at reconfiguring it to give more Americans the out ook, education, skills, and safety nets they will need to compete against ther individuals in the flat world.
But the one thing it must do is  H I S IS N O T A T E S T quip American workers with more tools and social supports to reduce he new pressures of global competition.
That is what compassionate latism stands for, and it is built around five action areas: leadership, mus le building, cushioning, social activism, and parenting.
As enture capitalist John Doerr once remarked to me, "You talk to the lead rship in China, and they are all the engineers, and they get what is going n immediately.
hen China's prime minister, Wen Jiabao, visited India for the first ime in April 2005, he didn't fly into the capital, New Delhias foreign eaders usually do.
They seem to go out of their way actually to make their con tituents stupid encouraging them to believe that certain jobs are American jobs" and can be protected from foreign competition, or that ecause America has always dominated economically in our lifetimes it  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lways will, or that compassion should be equated with protectionism.
It s hard to have an American national strategy for dealing with flatism f people won't even acknowledge that there is an education gap emerg ng and that there is an ambition gap emerging and that we are in a quiet risis.
For instance, of all the policy choices that the Republican-led ongress could have made in forging the FY 2005 budget, how in the orld could it have decided to cut the funding of the National Science oundation by more than $100 million?
But after a while it stopped listening to its cus omers.
Transformation of an enterprise begins with a sense of crisis or  H I S IS N O T A T E S T rgency/' Gerstner told students at Harvard Business School, in a Decem er 9, 2002, talk.
hen Lou Gerstner came in, one of the first things he did was re lace the notion of lifetime employment with the notion of lifetime employability.
I was head of sales for IBM France at the time.
Average Joe has to become special, spe ialized, synthesizing, or adaptable Joe.
There is more to political leadership than a compe ition for who can offer the most lavish safety nets.
President Kennedy understood that the com etition with the Soviet Union was not a space race but a science race, hich was really an education race.
Yet the way he chose to get mericans excited about sacrificing and buckling down to do what it took o win the Cold Warwhich required a large-scale push in science and ngineeringwas by laying out the vision of putting a man on the moon, ot a missile into Moscow.
If President Bush is looking for a similar legacy roject, there is one just crying outa national science initiative that ould be our generation's moon shot: a crash program for alternative en rgy and conservation to make America energy-independent in ten years.
f President Bush made energy independence his moon shot, in one fell woop he would dry up revenue for terrorism, force Iran, Russia, Vene uela, and Saudi Arabia onto the path of reformwhich they will never o with $60-a-barrel oilstrengthen the dollar, and improve his own tanding in Europe by doing something huge to reduce global warming.
e would also create a real magnet to inspire young people to contribute o both the war on terrorism and America's future by again becoming sci ntists, engineers, and mathematicians.
ummoning all our strengths and skills to produce a twenty-first-century enewable energy source is George W. Bush's opportunity to be both ixon going to China and JFK going to the moon in one move.
H I S IS N O T A T E S T USCLES  nce lifetime employment is a form of fat that a flat world simply can ot sustain any longer, compassionate flatism seeks to focus its energy n how government and business can enhance every worker s lifetime employability.
he social contract that progressives should try to enforce between gov rnment and workers, and companies and workers, is one in which gov rnment and companies say, "We cannot guarantee you any lifetime mployment.
iven that reality, argues Lawrence, it becomes increasingly impor ant for society, to the extent possible, to make benefits and education  he two key ingredients of employabilityas flexible as possible.
The more the work orce feels mobile in terms of health care, pension benefits, and life ong learning possibilitiesthe more it will be willing and able to jump nto the new industries and new job niches spawned by the flat world and o move from dying companies to thriving companies.
reating legal and institutional frameworks for universal portability of ensions and health carein addition to Social Security, Medicare, and edicaidwill help people build up such muscles.
This universal plan, which you ould open with your first job, would encourage workers to establish 401 (k) ax-deferred savings programs.
n addition to this simple, portable, and universal pension program, ill Marshall, president of the Progressive Policy Institute, proposes leg slation that would make it much easier and more likely for workers to btain stock options in the companies for which they work.
Such legis ation would give tax incentives to companies to give more workers more ptions earlier and penalize companies that do not.
Again, I favor the type of portable health-care program roposed by PPI.
hese pools would set the rules and create the marketplace in which in urance companies could offer a menu of options.
hen it comes to building muscles of lifetime employability, gov rnment has another critical role to play: upgrading the educational evel of the entire American workforce.
In Chapter 7, I discussed the ight kind of education for the jobs of the new middle.
The right education can be built only on top of a sound ducation in the fundamentalsreading comprehension, writing, arith-  H I S IS N O T A T E S T etic, and basic science.
We said everyone is going to have to have a secondary education," aid Stanford University economist Paul Romer.
The obvious challenge, Romer added, is to ake tertiary education, if not compulsory, then government-subsidized or at least two years, whether it is at a state university, a community col ege, or a technical school.
Tertiary education is more critical the flatter the orld gets, because technology will be churning old jobs, and spawning ew, more complex ones, much faster than during the transition from the gricultural economy to the industrial one.
First, it roduces more people with the skills to claim higher-value-added work n the new niches that require more pattern recognition, synthesizing,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nd complex problem solving.
But oving from being a phone operator after the job got outsourced to India o being able to install or repair phone-mail systemsor write their soft arerequires a whole new leap upward.
Take, for instance, CapitalOne, the global redit card company, which began outsourcing elements of its backroom perations to Wipro and Infosys in India over the past few years.
CapitalOne began, though, by trying to educate its employ es through workshops about the company's competitive predicament.
It ade clear that there is no safe haven where lifetime employment is pos ible anymoreinside CapitalOne or outside.
Then it developed a pro ram for the cross training of computer programmers, those most affected y outsourcing.
The company would take a programmer who specialized n mainframes and teach him or her to be a distributed systems program er as well.
CapitalOne did similar cross training on its business side, in verything from auto loans to risk management.
As a result, the workers ho were eventually let go in an outsourcing move were much better syn hesizers, much more versatile, and therefore in a much better position to et new jobs, because they were cross trained.
And those who were cross rained but retained by CapitalOne were more versatile and therefore ore valuable to CapitalOne, because they could do multiple tasks.
hat is why our whole society benefits when government provides sub idies or tax incentives to companies to offer as wide an array as possible f in-house learning opportunities.
The menu of Internet-based workertraining programs today is enormousfrom online degree programs to inhouse guided training for different specializations.
For in tance, we have not even begun to tap the potential of putting the lectures f great teachers on video.
Not only is the menu enormous and rowing, but the cost to the company for offering these educational options s very low.
The more lifetime learning opportunities that companies pro ide, the more they are both widening the skill base of their own workforce nd fulfilling a moral obligation to workers whose jobs are outsourced to ee to it that they leave more employable than they came.
Most of the Indian, hinese, Russian, Japanese, Korean, Iranian, Arab, and Israeli engineers, hysicists, and scientists who come to work or study in the United States ake great citizens.
They are exacdy the type of people this country needs, and we cannot let the FBI, CIA, nd Homeland Security, in their zeal to keep out the next Mohammed tta, also keep out the next Sergey Brin, one of the cofounders of Google, ho was bom in Russia.
The sort of good fat that actually needs to e added for a flat world is wage insurance.
ccording to a study by Lori Kletzer, an economist at the University f California, Santa Cruz, in the 1980s and '90s, two-thirds of workers ho lost jobs in manufacturing industries hit by overseas competition arned less on their next job.
Losing a job or any reason is a traumafor the worker and his or her familybut articularly for older workers who are less able to adapt to new produc ion techniques or lack the education to move up into more skilled ser ice jobs.
his idea of wage insurance was first proposed in 1986 by Harvard's obert Lawrence and Robert E. Litan of the Brookings Institution, in a ook called Saving Free Trade.
This commission couldn't agree on anything ncluding the causes of or what to do about the trade deficitother than he wisdom of wage insurance.
ut suppose one day your lathe job gets moved to China or your basic ac ounting work is outsourced to India and you have to go out and find a ew job.
You will be aid largely for your general skills, your high school education or college egree.
he standard state-run unemployment insurance program eases ome of this pain for workers, but it does not address their bigger con erns of declining wages in a new job and the inability to pay for health nsurance while they are unemployed and searching.
First, they would have to have lost their job through ome form of displacementoffshoring, outsourcing, downsizing, or actory closure.
And third, the wage insurance would not be paid until the orkers found new jobs, which would provide a strong incentive to look or work quickly and increase the chances that they would get on-the-job etraining.
On-the-job training is always the best way to learn new kills instead of having to sign up for some general government train ng program, with no promise of a job at the other end, and go through hat while remaining unemployed.
Wage insurance seems to me a uch better idea than relying only on the traditional unemployment in urance offered by states, which usually covers only about 50 percent of ost workers' previous wages, is limited to six months, and does not help orkers who suffer a loss of earnings after they take a new job.
Also, while unemployed workers can earn an addi ional fifty-two weeks of unemployment insurance if they enroll in an ap roved retraining program, workers have no guarantee that when they inish such a program they will have a job.
More ver, such a program would be eminently affordable.
Litan estimated that t an unemployment rate of 5 percent, the wage insurance and health are subsidy today would cost around $8 billion a year, which is peanuts ompared to the positive impact it could have on workers.
This program ould not replace classic state-run unemployment insurance for workers ho opt for that, but if it worked as projected, it could actually reduce the ost of such programs by moving people back to work quicker.
And after these wrenching negotiations the unions gree.
Former Mexican president Ernesto Zedillo is very sensitive to this roblem, having had to manage Mexico's transition into NAFTA, with all f the strains that put on Mexican society.
lways remember, said Zedillo, that behind all this technology is a olitical infrastructure that enables it to play out.
ARENTING   discussion of compassionate flatism would be complete without lso discussing the need for improved parenting.
he sense of entitlement, the sense that because we once dominated lobal commerce and geopoliticsand Olympic basketballwe always ill, the sense that delayed gratification is a punishment worse than a panking, the sense that our kids have to be swaddled in cotton wool so hat nothing bad or disappointing or stressful ever happens to them at chool is, quite simply, a growing cancer on American society.
And if we on't start to reverse it, our kids are going to be in for a huge and socially isruptive shock from the flat world.
hortly after this book first came out my wife (a schoolteacher) ointed out to me a letter to the editor in The New York Times (Sep ember 1, 2005) in response to a column on faltering American educa ion by my colleague Bob Herbert.
The letter summed up my feelings xactly: "To the Editor: Regarding the state of education in the United tates, Bob Herbert writes, 'I respectfully suggest that we may be looking t a crisis h e r e ' .
Education begins in a home where eading is intrinsically valuable and necessary; where recognition of the ard work associated with education and doing well in school are top pri rities; and where parents join schools in having high expectations for heir children's success.
Jo Ann Price, reehold, N.J." avid Baltimore, the Nobel Prize-winning president of Caltech, nows what it takes to get your child ready to compete against the cream  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f the global crop.
He told me that he is struck by the fact that almost all he students who make it to Caltech, one of the best scientific universities n the world, come from public schools, not from private schools that ometimes nurture a sense that just because you are there, you are special nd entitied.
"I look at the kids who come to Caltech, and they grew up n families that encouraged them to work hard and to put off a little bit of ratification for the future and to understand that they need to hone their kills to play an important role in the world," Baltimore said.
Public education is producing hese remarkable studentsso it can be done.
I think we need  revolution in this country when it comes to parenting around education."
A significant ma ority of the students coming to Caltech in the engineering disciplines re foreign-born, and a large fraction of its current faculty is foreign-born.
By the way, nearly 0 percent of the kids who go to MIT, a school just like Caltech, also ome from two-parent homes, where both parents can help guide a child own the straight and narrow.
n July 2004, comedian Bill Cosby used an appearance at Jesse ackson's Rainbow/PUSH Coalition & Citizenship Education Fund's an ual conference to upbraid African Americans for not teaching their chil ren proper grammar and for black kids not striving to learn more hemselves.
Referring to African mericans who squandered their chances for a better life, Cosby told the ainbow Coalition, "You've got to stop beating up your women because ou can't find a job, because you didn't want to get an education and now  H I S IS N O T A T E S T ou're [earning] minimum wage.
Our children will increasingly be competing ead-to-head with Chinese, Indian, and Asian kids, whose parents have  lot more of Hattie's character-building approach than their own merican parents.
I am not suggesting that we militarize education, but  am suggesting that we do more to push our young people to go beyond heir comfort zones, to do things right, and to be ready to suffer some hort-run pain for longer gain.
Paul A. Samuelson, the Nobel Prize-winning conomist from MIT whose textbooks have shaped economics students round the world for nearly five decades, gave a rare interview with the erman weekly Der Spiegel, for a special issue titled Globalization: The ew World (December 2005).
In the past, right kids who later became mathematicians were doing challenging uzzles.
n October 24, 2005, Time magazine ran a cover story about Apple's atest invention.
The cover showed Jobs holding up the newest Apple Pod, the one that plays videos as well as music.
My friend Jerry Rao, the Indian entrepre eur who founded MphasiS, made an offhand comment to me one day hat still rings in my ear.
For India and China the future is very clear, he aid.
That is so rightAmerica's job is not to fight ith India and China over the old middle but to invent the new middle, nd more.
But as nowledge hurtles forward, inventing the future becomes a harder and arder taskone that takes more of the right education, the right infra tructure, the right ambition, the right leadership, the right parenting.
he future won't wait for us, and if we don't invent it, someone else ill. Because, as Jerry Rao will also tell you, India and China will be do ng tomorrow what America does today, but, thanks to the flat-world plat orm, the day after tomorrow, India, China, and many others will also be  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nventing the future.
But he Indias and Chinas are increasingly adding one more thing to low-cost abor and high-power technology: unfettered imaginationthat is, high nnovative and creative capacities.
Frank Schirrmacher, publisher of the German newspaper Frankfurter llgemeine eitung, commenting to The New York Times about the need or German workers to retool and work longer hours eek knowledge even unto China.
saying of the Prophet Muhammad e more I worked on this book, the more I found myself asking eople I met around the world where they were when they first iscovered that the world was flat.
n the space of two weeks, I got two revealing answers, one from exico, one from Egypt.
I was in Mexico City in the spring of 2004, and  put the question on the table during lunch with a few Mexican jour alist colleagues.
One of them said he realized that he was living in a ew world when he started seeing reports appearing in the Mexican me ia and on the Internet that some statuettes of Mexico's patron saint, the irgin of Guadalupe, were being imported into Mexico from China, robably via ports in California.
When you are Mexico and your claim o fame is that you are a low-wage manufacturing country, and some of our people are importing statuettes of your own patron saint from  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hina, because China can make them and ship them all the way across he Pacific more cheaply than you can produce them, you are living in a lat world.
Over at the Central Bank of Mexico, I sked its governor, Guillermo Ortiz, whether he was aware of this issue.
e rolled his eyes and told me that for some time now just by staring at he numbers on his computer screen he could feel the competitive play ng field being leveledand see that Mexico was losing some of its nat ral geographic advantages with the U.S. market.
"We started looking at he numbers in 2001  it was the first year in two decades that [Mexico's] xports to the U.S. declined," said Ortiz.
And it was about China."
hina is such a powerhouse of low-cost manufacturing that even hough the NAFTA accord has given Mexico a leg up with the United tates, and even though Mexico is right next door to us, China in 2003 eplaced Mexico as the number two exporter to the United States.
Canada remains number one.)
Though Mexico still has a strong posi ion in big-ticket exports that are costly to ship, such as cars, auto parts, nd refrigerators, China is coming on strong and has already displaced exico in areas such as computer parts, electrical components, toys, tex iles, sporting goods, and tennis shoes.
But what's even worse for Mexico s that China is displacing some Mexican companies in Mexico, where hinese-made clothing and toys are now showing up on store shelves verywhere.
No wonder a Mexican journalist told me about the day he nterviewed a Chinese central bank official, who told him something bout China's relationship with America that really rattled him: "First we ere afraid of the wolf, then we wanted to dance with the wolf, and now e want to be the wolf."
few days after returning from Mexico, I had breakfast in Wash ngton with a friend from Egypt, Lamees El-Hadidy, a longtime business eporter in Cairo.
She had done a story for NBC Arabiya Television about the colorful lanterns called fawanis, HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE ach with a burning candle inside, that Egyptian schoolchildren tradi ionally carried around during Ramadan, a tradition dating back cen uries to the Fatimid period in Egypt.
hat was when plastic Chinese-made Ramadan lanterns, each with a attery-powered light instead of a candle, began flooding the market, rippling the traditional Egyptian workshops.
These lanterns come out of our tradition, our soul, but [the hinese versions] are more creative and advanced than the Egyptian nes."
Lamees said that when she asked Egyptians, "Do you know where hese are made?"
Then they would turn the amps over and see that they came from China.
any mothers, like Lamees, though, appreciated the fact that the hinese versions are safer than the traditional Egyptian ones, which are ade with sharp metal edges and glass, and usually still use candles.
The hinese versions are made of plastic and feature flashing lights and have n embedded microchip that plays traditional Egyptian Ramadan tunes nd even the theme song to the popular Ramadan T V cartoon series akkar.
As Business Monthly, published by the American Chamber of ommerce in Egypt, reported in its December 2001 issue, Chinese im orters "are pitted not only against each other, but also against the severalhundred-year-old Egyptian industry.
'Of all fawanis on the market, I don't think that more than 5 percent are now made n Egypt.'
People with ties to the Egyptian [fawanis] industry believe hina has a clear advantage over Egypt.
With its superior technology, hey said, China can make mass quantities, which helps to keep prices elatively low.
Egypt's traditional [fawanis] industry, by contrast, is char cterized by a series of workshops specialized in different stages of the pro uction process.
'There will always be fawanis in Ramadan, but in  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he future I think Egyptian-made ones could become extinct/ Zayat said.
There is no way they can ever compete with things made in China.'"
hink how crazy that statement is: Egypt has masses of low-wage orkers, like China.
It ould be and should be the Taiwan of the eastern Mediterranean, but in tead it is throwing in the towel to atheistic China on the manufacture of ne of Muslim Egypt's most cherished cultural artifacts.
Ibrahim El sway, one of the main importers from China of fawanis, gave Business onthly a tour of his warehouse in the Egyptian town of Muski: He had mported sixteen different models of Ramadan lanterns from China in 004.
This chapter focuses on what sort of policies eveloping countries need to undertake in order to create the right envi onment for their companies and entrepreneurs to thrive in a flat world, lthough many of the things I am about to say apply to many developed ountries as well.
As that Chinese banking official oasted to my Mexican colleague, China is the wolf.
Of all the ten flatten d, the entry of China into the world market is the most important for de eloping countries, and for many developed countries.
China can do igh-quality low-cost manufacturing better than any other country, and in reasingly, it also can do high-quality higher-cost manufacturing.
o that end, I believe that what the world needs today is a club that ould be modeled after Alcoholics Anonymous (A.A.).
meeting you attend you have to stand up and say, "My name is homas Friedman and I'm an alcoholic," so at Developing Countries nonymous, countries would have to stand up at their first meeting and ay, "My name is Syria and I'm underdeveloped."
very country needs "the ability to make [its] own introspection," ince "no country develops without going through an X-ray of where you re and where your limits are," said Luis de la Calle, one of Mexico's hief NAFTA crafters and negotiators.
Countries that fall off the devel pment wagon are a bit like drunks; to get back on they have to learn to ee themselves as they really are.
Development is a voluntary process.
Today our competition is a Japanese or a renchman or a Chinese.
The first is the right infrastructure to con ect more of your people with the flat-world platformfrom cheap nternet bandwidth and mobile phones to modern airports and roads.
he second is the right educational system to get more of your people in ovating and collaborating on the flat-world platform.
uring the late 1970s, but particularly after the fall of the Berlin Wall, s the world really started to flatten out, a lot of countries began trying to eform themselves accordingly.
They focused on improving education nd infrastructure and, in particular, adopting better governance.
These wholesale reforms were initiated by a mall handful of leaders in countries such as China, Russia, Mexico, HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE razil, and India.
They pushed their countries into more xport-oriented, free-market strategiesbased on privatization of state ompanies, deregulation of financial markets, currency adjustments, for ign direct investment, shrinking subsidies, lowering of protectionist tariff arriers, and introduction of more flexible labor lawsfrom the top down ithout ever really asking the people.
Ernesto Zedillo, who served as pres dent of Mexico from 1994 to 2000 and was minister of planning and bud et before that, once remarked to me that all the decisions to open the exican economy were taken by three people.
How many people do you uppose Deng Xiaoping consulted before he declared, "To get rich is glo ious," and uncorked the Chinese economy, or when he dismissed those ho questioned China s move from communism to free markets by saying hat what mattered was jobs and incomes, not ideology?
In 1991, when India's finance inister, Manmohan Singh, took the first tentative steps to open India's conomy to more foreign trade, investment, and competition, it was a re ult not of some considered national debate and dialogue, but of the fact hat India's economy at that moment was so sclerotic, so unappealing to oreign investors, that it had almost run out of foreign currency.
When ikhail Gorbachev started dabbling with perestroika, it was with his back p against the Kremlin wall and with few allies in the Soviet leadership.
hat all these leaders confronted was the irrefutable fact that more pen and competitive markets are the only sustainable vehicle for grow ng a nation out of poverty, because they are the only guarantee that new deas, technologies, and best practices will easily flow into your country nd that private enterprises, and even government, will have the com etitive incentive and flexibility to adopt those new ideas and turn them nto jobs and products.
This is why the nonglobalizing countries, those  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hat refused to do any reform wholesale North Korea, for instance  ctually saw their per capita GDP growth shrink in the 1990s, while ountries that moved from a more socialist model to a globalizing model aw their per capita GDP grow in the 1990s.
As David Dollar and Art ray conclude in their book Trade, Growth, and Poverty, economic rowth and trade remain the best antipoverty program in the world.
he World Bank reported that in 1990 there were roughly 375 million eople in China living in extreme poverty, on less than $1 per day.
By 2001, here were 212 million Chinese living in extreme poverty, and by 2015, if urrent trends hold, there will be only 16 million living on less than $1 a ay.
In South Asiaprimarily India, Pakistan, and Bangladeshthe num ers go from 462 million in 1990 living on less than $1 a day down to 31 million by 2001 and down to 216 million in 2015.
But as the world started to get smaller nd flatterenabling China to compete everywhere with everyone on a road range of manufactured products, enabling India to export its rainpower everywhere, enabling corporations to outsource any task any here, and enabling individuals to compete globally as never before  eform wholesale, confined largely to macroeconomics, was no longer ufficient to keep countries on a sustainable growth path.
A deeper rocess of reform was requiredone that would transform education, in rastructure, and governance in a much more profound manner.
The United States would be a gated ommunity, with a metal detector at the front gate and a lot of people sit ing in their front yards complaining about how lazy everyone else was, ven though out back there was a small opening in the fence for exican labor and other energetic immigrants who helped to make the ated community function.
It's definitely the place to hang ut, but in between the clubs, you don't see a lot of new businesses open ng up, except on the street where the Chileans live.
The Arab street would be a dark alley where out iders fear to tread, except for a few side streets called Dubai, Jordan, ahrain, Qatar, and Morocco.
India, China, and East Asia ould be "the other side of the tracks."
On he Indian streets, by contrast, no one ever repairs the streetlights, the oads are full of ruts, but the police are sticklers for the rules.
You need a icense to open a lemonade stand on the Indian streets.
Luckily, the lo al cops can be bribed, and the successful entrepreneurs all have their wn generators to run their factories and the latest cell phones to get  H E W O R L D IS F L A T round the fact that the local telephone poles are all down.
Africa, sadly, s that part of town where the businesses are boarded up, life expectancy s declining, and the only new buildings are health-care clinics.
It involves looking at infrastructure, education, and gov rnance and upgrading each one, so more of your people have the tools and egal framework to innovate and collaborate at the highest levels.
any of the key elements of reform retail were best defined by the re earch done by the World Banks International Finance Corporation IFC) and its economic analysis team led by its chief economist, Michael lein.
To begin with, you don't grow our country out of poverty by guaranteeing everyone a job.
Egypt guar ntees all college graduates a job each year, and it has been mired in overty with a slow-growing economy for fifty years.
If it were just a matter of the number of jobs, solutions would be asy," note Klein and Bita Hadjimichael in their World Bank Study, The rivate Sector in Development.
Productivity growth and, hence, the way out of poverty, is not simply a atter of throwing resources at the problem," say Klein and Hadjimichael.
In other words, ountries grow out of poverty not only when they manage their fiscal and onetary policies responsibly from above, i.e., reform wholesale.
In re ent years, a lot of attention and moral concern has been devoted to the HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE roblem of persistent poverty, particularly in Africa.
ut persistent poverty is a practical problem as well as a moral one, and e do ourselves no good to focus on our moral failings and not the prac ical shortcomings of the countries and governments involved.
Poor eople grow out of poverty when their governments create an environ ent in which educated workers and capitalists have the physical and le al infrastructure that makes it easy to start businesses, raise capital, and ecome entrepreneurs, and when they subject their people to at least ome competition from beyondbecause companies and countries with ompetitors always innovate more, better, and faster.
He then publishes the articles of associa-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ion in the official gazette, pays a stamp fee, registers at the inistry of Justice, and waits 90 days before filing for social secu ity.
One hundred sixty-eight days after he commences the pro ess, Teuku can legally start operations.
n Panama, another entrepreneur, Ina, registers her construc ion company in only 19 days.
li, a trader in the United Arab Emirates, can hire and fire ith ease.
imnit, a young entrepreneur in Ethiopia, wants to expand er successful consulting business by taking a loan.
aving registered, hired workers, enforced contracts, and ob ained credit, Avik, a businessman in India, cannot make a profit nd goes out of business.
Faced with a 10-year-long process of go ng through bankruptcy, Avik absconds, leaving his workers, the ank, and the tax agency with nothing.
HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE f you want to know why two decades of macroeconomic reform holesale at the top have not slowed the spread of poverty and produced nough new jobs in key countries of Latin America, Africa, the Arab orld, and the former Soviet Empire, it is because there has been too lit le reform retail.
It takes two days to start a business in Australia, but 203 days in Haiti nd 215 days in the Democratic Republic of Congo," the IFC study ound.
"There are no monetary costs to start a new business in Denmark, ut it costs more than five times income per capita in Cambodia and over hirteen times in Sierra Leone.
Hong Kong, Singapore, Thailand and ore than three dozen other economies require no minimum capital rom start-ups.
In contrast, in Syria the capital requirement is equivalent to ifty-six times income per capita .
Businesses in the Czech Republic and enmark can hire workers on part-time orfixed-termcontracts for any job, ithout specifying maximum duration of the contract.
In contrast, em loyment laws in El Salvador allow fixed-term contracts only for specific obs, and set their duration to be at most one year .
A simple commercial ontract is enforced in seven days in Tunisia and thirty-nine days in the etherlands, but takes almost 1,500 days in Guatemala.
The cost of en orcement is less than 1 percent of the disputed amount in Austria, Canada nd the United Kingdom, but more than 100 percent in Burkina Faso, the ominican Republic, Indonesia .
and the Philippines.
Credit bureaus ontain credit histories on almost every adult in New Zealand, Norway nd the United States.
But the credit registries in Cameroon, Ghana, akistan, Nigeria and Serbia and Montenegro have credit histories for less han 1 percent of adults.
In Colombia, the Republic of Congo, Mexico, Oman and Tu isia, a creditor has no such rights.
It takes less than six months to go  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hrough bankruptcy proceedings in Ireland and Japan, but more than ten ears in Brazil and India.
It costs less than 1 percent of the value of the state to resolve insolvency in Finland, the Netherlands, Norway and ingaporeand nearly half the estate value in Chad, Panama, Mace onia, Venezuela, Serbia and Montenegro, and Sierra Leone."
"There is no reason for Angola to have one f the most rigid employment laws if Portugal, whose laws Angola dapted, has already revised them twice to make the labor market more lexible," says the IFC study.
Two, focus on enhancing property rights.
Secure property rights have enabled parents to leave their homes and ind jobs instead of staying in to protect the property," says the IFC study.
hree, expand the use of the Internet for regulation fulfillment.
hat is striking about the IFC's criteria is that many people think hey are relevant only for Peru and Argentina, but in fact some of the HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE ountries that score worst are places like Germany and Italy.
OLLOW THE LEAPIN' EPRECHAUNS  ^ \ n e of the best examples of a country that has made a huge leap forV_>/ward by choosing development and reform retail of its governance, nfrastructure, and education is Ireland.
Here's something you probably idn't know: Ireland today is the richest country in the European Union fter Luxembourg.
Yes, the country that for hundreds of years was best nown for emigration, tragic poets, famines, civil wars, and leprechauns oday has a per capita GDP higher than that of Germany, France, and ritain.
How Ireland went from the sick man of Europe to the rich man n less than a generation is an amazing story.
Ireland's turnaround actually egan in the late 1960s, when the government eliminated the fee for sec ndary education, enabling a lot more working-class kids to get a high chool or technical degree.
As a result, in the years after Ireland joined the uropean Community in 1973, it was able to draw on a much more ducated workforce than it had had in the previous generation.
By the id-1980s, though, Ireland had reaped the initial benefits of E C embershipsubsidies to build better infrastructure and a bigger market o sell its products into.
But it did not have enough competitive products o sell, because of the legacy of years of protectionism and fiscal misman gement.
And change Ireland did.
In a uite unusual development, the government, the main trade unions, armers, and industrialists came together and agreed on a program of fis al austerity, slashing corporate taxes to 12.5 percent (far below the rest  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f Europe), moderating wages and prices, and aggressively courting for ign investment.
In 1996, Ireland made public college education basi ally free, creating an even more educated workforce.
Today, nine of the world's ten top pharmaceutical compa ies have operations in Ireland, as do sixteen of the top twenty medical evice companies and seven of the top ten software firms.
In 2004, reland got more foreign direct investment from America than China got rom America.
We set up in Ireland in 1990," Michael Dell, founder of Dell omputer, explained to me in an e-mail.
[Also,] Ireland has n industrial and tax policy which is consistently very supportive of busi esses, independent of which political party is in power.
[Ireland also has] very good trans ortation and logistics and a good locationeasy to move products to ajor markets in Europe quickly."
The talent in Ireland has proven to be a wonderful re ource for us.
Fun fact: We are Ireland's largest exporter."
ntel opened its first chip factory in Ireland in 1993.
James Jarrett, an ntel vice president, said Intel was attracted by Ireland's large pool of edu ated young men and women, low corporate taxes, and other incentives hat saved Intel roughly $1 billion over ten years.
Ireland's national health arewhich certainly lightens Intel's health coverage obligationsdidn't urt, either.
arry Kraemer Jr., the former C E O of Baxter International, a medical quipment maker that has made several investments in Ireland, explained hat "the energy level, the work ethic, the tax optimization, and the flexi ility of the labor supply" all made Ireland infinitely more attractive to in est in than France or Germany, where it is enormously costly to fire even ne worker.
Ireland is "playing of ense," Kraemer said, while Germany and France are "playing defense," nd the more they try to protect every old job, the fewer new ones they ttract.
Look at the results: In 1990, Ireland's total workforce was 1.1 mil ion.
ut Ireland has started to play offense in a lot of other ways as well.
It nitially focused on attracting investments from U.S. high-tech compa ies by offering them quality infrastructure, a flexible, educated work orce, and low corporate taxes.
But now, explained Ireland's minister of ducation, Mary Hanafin, the country wants to take reform retail in ed cation to a new level.
It has started a campaign to double the number f Ph.D.'s it graduates in science and engineering by 2010, and it has set p various funds to get global companies, and brainy people of all kinds, o come to Ireland to do research.
Ireland is now actively recruiting hinese scientists in particular.
Ireland set up a science founda ion to give grants to any researcher from anywhere in the world who had n idea that he or she would pursue in Ireland and that might one day roduce a company or a product.
Between 2001 and 2005, Science Foun ation Ireland established more than 160 new research groups, 34 of hem led by leading scientists who have come to Ireland from laborato ies abroad, according to an independent report commissioned by the rish government.
Incidentally, the first head of Science Foundation reland was an American who had worked at the National Science oundation.
If it did, all the jobs ould be in Haiti and Bangladesh.
It is looking for the most productive abor at the lowest price, which means that in order to attract the capital, our country has to get those four basics infrastructure, education, gov rnance, and environmentright.
John Chambers, the C E O of Cisco ystems, which uses a global supply chain to build the routers that run  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he Internet and is constantly being wooed to invest in one country or an ther, said it best: "The jobs are going to go where the best-educated orkforce is with the most competitive infrastructure and environment or creativity and supportive government.
This may or may ot be the countries who led the Industrial Revolution."
ndeed, Sir John Rose, the chief executive of Rolls-Royce, once re arked to me that in what I call the flat world we will speak less and less bout "developed, developing, and underdeveloped countries" and ore and more about "smart, smarter, and smartest countries."
Ireland's prime minister, ertie Ahern, told me in June 2005, "I've met the premier of China five imes in the last two years."
So why do some countries get over this re orm retail hump, with leaders able to mobilize their people to really mprove their infrastructure, education, and governance, and other coun ries stall?
One is The ealth and Poverty of Nations, by the economist David Landes.
Harrison argues that a ociety maintains cultural continuity through a variety of instruments nd institutions "that transmit its values and attitudes from generation to eneration [through] child-rearing, education, the media, and leader hip," as well as religion, which may be the most salient of all.
Indeed, arrison argues that "when it comes to the relationship between religion nd human progress, I find compelling evidence that some religions do etter than others in promoting the goals of democratic politics, social ustice and prosperity."
The natural ability to glocalize has been one of the trengths of Indian culture, American culture, Japanese culture, and, ately, Chinese culture.
The Indians, for instance, take the view that the oguls come, the Moguls go, the British come, the British go, we take he best and leave the restbut we still eat curry, our women still wear aris, and we still live in tightly bound extended family units.
Cultures that are open and willing to change have a huge advantage n this world," said Jerry Rao, the MphasiS C E O who heads the Indian igh-tech trade association.
Think about it, think about the time hen the emperor in China threw out the British ambassador.
For complicated cultural and historical rea ons, many of them do not glocalize well, although there are plenty of xceptionsnamely, Turkey, Lebanon, Bahrain, Dubai, Indonesia, and alaysia.
In a world where the single greatest advantage a cul ure can have is the ability to foster adaptability and adoptability, the uslim world today is dominated by a religious clergy that literally bans jtihad, reinterpretation of the principles of Islam in light of current ircumstances.
Tribal culture and thinking till dominate in many Arab countries, and the tribal mind-set is also nathema to collaboration.
And what is the motto of the globalists, those who build ollaborative supply chains?
"Me and my brother and my cousin, three riends from childhood, four people in Australia, two in Beijing, six in angalore, three from Germany, and four people we've met only over he Internet all make up a single global supply chain."
n the Arab-Muslim world, argues David Landes, certain cultural at itudes have in many ways become a barrier to development, particularly he tendency to still treat women as a source of danger or pollution to be ut off from the public space and denied entry into economic activities.
he Arab-Muslim world's resistance to glocalization is something that ome liberal Arab commentators are now focusing on.
Consider a May 5,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T 004, article in the Saudi English-language daily Arab News by liberal audi journalist Raid Qusti, titled "How Long Before the First Step?"
Terrorist incidents in Saudi Arabia are more or less becoming everyday news.
"One explanation to why all of this is happening was rought up by the editor in chief oAl-Riyadh newspaper, Turki Al-Sudairi, n a program about determining the roots of the terrorist acts.
Our education system, which does not stress tolerance of other faithslet alone tolerance of followers of other Islamic chools of thoughtis one thing that needs to be re-evaluated from top to ottom.
When tolerance is the norm, everyone flourishesbecause olerance breeds trust, and trust is the foundation of innovation and entrepreneurship.
"China began its astounding commercial and industrial takeoff only when Mao Zedong's odiously intolerant form of communism was scrapped in favor of what might be called HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE otalitarian laissez-faire," wrote the British historian Paul Johnson in a une 21, 2004, essay in Forbes.
"India is another example.
When left to themselves, Indians (like the Chinese) always pros er as a community.
Take the case of Uganda's Indian population, which as expelled by the horrific dictator Idi Amin and received into the tol rant society of Britain.
There are now more millionaires in this group han in any other recent immigrant community in Britain.
They are a triking example of how far hard work, strong family bonds and devotion o education can carry a people who have been stripped of all their orldly assets."
Islam, down through the years, has thrived when it fos ered a culture of tolerance, as in Moorish Spain.
But in its modern form, n too many cases Islam has been captured and interpreted by spiritual eaders who do not embrace a culture of tolerance, change, or innova ion, and that, Johnson noted, surely has contributed to lagging eco omic growth in many Muslim lands.
They are  product of the contextgeography, education level, leadership, and istorical experience of any society.
Japan and Germany went from highly militarized societies to ighly pacifist and staunchly democratic societies in the last fifty years.
China during the Cultural Revolution seemed like a nation in the rip of a culture of ideological madness.
China today is a synonym for ragmatism.
Muslim Saudi Arabia today is one of the most intol rant.
Yet right next to Saudi Arabia its Dubai, an Arab city-state that has used its petrodollars to build the trad ng, tourist, service, and computing center of the Arab Gulf.
Dubai is one f the most tolerant, cosmopolitan places in the world, with, it often eems, more sushi bars and golf courses than mosquesand tourists don't ven need a visa.
Like many Indian mericans, Dinakar Singh, the hedge fund manager, regularly goes ack to India to visit family.
When I saw him a few months later, he told me about he moment when he realized why India's economy as a whole still had ot taken off as much as it should haveoutside of the high-tech sector.
I told Singh that his story reminded e of a trip I had just taken to Dalian, China.
The three most prominent buildings in the city then were he Nile Hilton, the Cairo Tower, and the Egyptian T V building.
I visited Mexico City shortly before Dalian, where I ad not visited in five years.
There were also a few ew buildings up, but not as many as I expected after a decade of NAFTA.
They told me that Mexico had lost its groove  it just wasn't grow ng like it had been, and people's self-confidence was waning.
In China, if you miss visiting a city for a year, it's like you aven't been there in forever.
And in Mexico City, just when Mexicans hought they had turned the corner forever, they ran smack into China, oming the other way and running much faster.
We know the basic formula for eco omic success reform wholesale, followed by reform retail, plus good overnance, education, infrastructure, and the ability to glocalize.
Some countries (such s South Korea and Taiwan) seem to be able to focus their energies on he priority of economic development, and others (such as Egypt and yria) get distracted by ideology or local feuds.
Why India had leaders who built nstitutes of technology and Pakistan had leaders who did not is a prod ct of history, geography, and culture that I can only summarize as one  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f those intangible things.
he best way I know to illustrate this is by comparing Mexico and hina.
Mexico, on paper, seemed perfectly positioned to thrive in a flat orld.
It signed a free-trade agreement with the United States and anada in the 1990s and was poised to be a springboard to Latin merica for both these huge economies.
China, by contrast, was thousands of miles away, burdened by verpopulation, with few natural resources, with its best labor crowded nto a coastal plain, and with a burdensome debt legacy from fifty years f Communist rule.
Ten years ago, if you took the names off these two ountries and just gave someone their profiles, he surely would have bet n Mexico.
And yet China has replaced Mexico as the second-largest ex orter of goods into the United States.
And there is a general sense, even mong Mexicans, that even though China is thousands of miles away rom America, it is growing closer to America economically, while exico, right on America's border, is becoming thousands of miles away.
am by no means writing Mexico off.
Mexico, in the fullness of time, ay turn out to be the slow-but-sure tortoise to China's hare.
China still as a huge political transition to get through, which could derail it at any oment.
Moreover, Mexico has many entrepreneurs who are as Chinese s the most entrepreneurial Chinese.
Mexico would not have exported 138 billion worth of goods to the United States in 2003 if that were not he case.
But on balance, when you add it all p, the fact is that China has become the hare and Mexico has not, even hough Mexico seemed to start with so many more natural advantages hen the world went flat.
"We are caught between India and hina," Jorge Castaneda, Mexico's former foreign minister, told me in HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE 004.
Where we should be competing, the services rea, we are hit by the Indians with their back offices and call centers."
o doubt China is benefiting to some degree from the fact that it still as an authoritarian system that can steamroll vested interests and ar haic practices.
Beijing's leadership can order many reforms from the op down, whether it is a new road or accession to the World Trade rganization.
ut China today also has better intangiblesan ability to summon nd focus local energies on reform retail.
China may be an authoritarian tate, but it nevertheless has strong state institutions and a bureaucracy hat manages to promote a lot of people on merit to key decision-making ositions, and it has a certain public-spiritedness.
The Mandarin tradition f promoting bureaucrats who see their role as promoting and protecting he interests of the state is still alive and well in China.
"China has a tra ition of meritocracya tradition that is also carried on in Korea and apan," said Francis Fukuyama, author of the classic The End of History nd the Last Man.
So just when Mexico eeds to summon all its will and energy for reform retail on the micro evel, it has to go through the much slower, albeit more legitimate, dem cratic process of constituency building.
In Mexico, "we did the first tages of structural reform from the top down," said Guillermo Ortiz, the entral Bank governor.
And Mexico's state sys-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ern, like that of so many of its Latin American neighbors, has a long his ory of simply being an instrument of patronage for the ruling party or lo al interests, not the national interest.
India and China both have a long tradition of parents telling heir children that the greatest thing they can be in life is an engineer or  doctor.
But building the schools to make that happen in Mexico sim ly has not been done.
India and China each have more than fifty thou and students studying in the United States today.
Mexico, which is smaller but right next oor, has only about ten thousand.
Mexico is also right next door to the orld's biggest economy, which speaks English.
But Mexico has not aunched any crash program in English education or invested in schol rships to send large numbers of Mexican students to the United States o study.
There is a "disconnect," said President Zedillo, among Mexico's olitical establishment, the challenges of globalization, and the degree o which anyone is educating and harnessing the Mexican public to this ask.
You would have to look a long time for a graduate science or math rogram at an American university that is dominated by Mexican stu ents the way most are dominated by Chinese and Indian students.
t would be easy to conclude from just looking at Mexico and China hat democracy may be a hindrance to reform retail.
I think the real issue is leadership.
There are emocracies that are blessed with leaders who are able to make the sale nd get their people focused on reform retail Margaret Thatcher in ngland comes to mindand there are democracies that drift for a long ime without biting the bulletmodern Germany, for example.
There re autocracies that really get focused modern Chinaand there are thers that just drift aimlessly, unwilling to summon their people be ause the leaders are so illegitimate they are afraid of inflicting any ainZimbabwe.
China is moving every onth, added Zedillo, "and we are taking years and years to decide on el mentary reforms whose needs should be strikingly urgent for any human eing.
We are not competitive because we don't have infrastructure; you eed people to pay taxes.
How many new highways have been built con ecting Mexico with the U.S. since NAFTA?
he only way for government to serve is to get people to pay higher taxes, but] then the populism comes up and kills it."
Mexican newspaper recently ran a story about how the Converse hoe company was making tennis shoes in China using Mexican glue.
t is not that Mexico has failed to modernize its export industries.
It is osing ground to China primarily because China has changed even aster and more broadly, particularly in educating knowledge workers.
As usiness consultant Daniel H. Rosen pointed out in an essay in The nternational Economy (Spring 2003), Mexico and China both saw their hare of global exports grow in many of the same areas during the boom ng 1990sfrom auto parts to electronics to toys and sporting goods  ut China's share was growing faster.
This was not just because of what hina was doing right but also because of what Mexico was doing rong, which was not steadily honing its competitiveness with microreforms.
What Mexico succeeded in doing was to create islands of com etitiveness, like Monterrey, where it got things right and could take dvantage of proximity to the United States, but the Mexican govern ent never had a strategy for melting those islands into the rest of the ountry.
This helps explain why from 1996 to 2002, Mexico's ranking in he Global Competitiveness Report actually fell while China's rose.
It was about China's ad antages in education, privatization, infrastructure, quality control, midlevel management, and the introduction of new technology.
So China is eating Mexico's lunch," concluded Rosen, "but more due o the Mexican inability to capitalize on successes and induce broader re orm than to China's lower wage workers per se."
According to the Doing Business in 200S report, it takes an verage of fifty-eight days to start a business in Mexico, compared with ight in Singapore and nine in Turkey.
It takes seventy-four days to register  property in Mexico, but only twelve in the United States.
Mexico's cor orate income tax rate of 34 percent is twice as high as China's.
he McKinsey Quarterly report "Beyond Cheap Labor" noted that ince 2000, as China joined the W T O and started to take advantage of he flattening of the world, Mexico lost 270,000 assembly jobs, and hun reds of factories closed.
But the main advice the report had for Mexico nd other middle-income countries feeling squeezed by China was this: Rather than fixating on jobs lost to China, these countries should re ember a fact of economic life: no place can remain the world's low-cost roducer forevereven China will lose that title one day.
Instead of try ng to defend low-wage assembly jobs, Mexico and other middle-income ountries should focus on creating jobs that add higher value.
Only if ore productive companies with higher-value-added activities replace ess productive ones can middle-income economies continue down the evelopment path."
n short, the only way for Mexico to thrive is with a strategy of reform etail that will enable it to beat China to the top, not the bottom, because hina is not focused on beating Mexico as much as it is on beating merica.
China does not just want to et rich.
China doesn't just want to learn how to ake G M cars.
HE IRGIN OF GUADALUPE aid Luis Rubio, president of Mexico's Center of Research for De elopment, "The more self-confidence you have, the more it diminishes our mythologies and complexes.
One of the great things about Mexico n the early 1990s was that Mexicans saw that they could do it, they could ake it."
A lot of that self-confidence, though, has been lost in Mexico in ecent years, because the government stopped reforming.
A lack of self-confidence [in Mexico] means that everyone in the coun ry thinks the U.S. is going to take Mexico to the cleaners."
That is why AFTA was so important for Mexico's self-confidence.
"What NAFTA ccomplished was to get Mexicans to think forward and outward instead f inward and backward.
[But] NAFTA was seen [by its architects] as an nd more than a beginning.
Unfortunately, he added, "Mexico did ot have a strategy for going forward."
Mexico got itself on the right track with reform holesale, but then, for a lot of tangible and intangible reasons, it just sat here and reform retail stalled.
The more Mexico just sits there, the more t is going to get run over.
But I will plead guilty to one thing: I do get a little ump in my throat when I see countries like China, India, or Ireland dopting a basically proglobalization strategy, adapting it to their own olitical, social, and economic conditions, and reaping the benefits.
Of ourse, there are costs to this growth as well in terms of environment, ocial cohesion, and economic equality, which governments need to onitor and mitigatebut let's stop downplaying the economic ben-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T fits, and let's stop pretending that the antiglobalization advocates have ny realistic strategy for bringing as many people out of poverty as uicklyif at all.
There are many speeds that a country can go at down his globalization pathand each country has to choose the right speed or its particular social and political circumstances.
o one said this better than Baldev Raj Nayar, emeritus professor f political science at McGill University, in his monograph India's lobalization: Evaluating the Economic Impact, which was excerpted by aleGlobal Online, February 1, 2007.
While Nayar uses the language of conomics, what he is saying in essence is that thanks to adopting a glob lization strategy India has experienced an economic revolution: s the driving force of the world economy since the mid-1970s, lobalization has become a lodestone for a wide-ranging attack cross a large expanse of the developing world for its alleged ma ign consequences.
Put imply, India has been a significant beneficiary of globalization espite its rather modest integration into the world economy.
fter a stringent regime of "autarky and command and control conomy," from 1956 to 1975, India started on a slow path of rein egration into the world economy, albeit in nascent form.
nterestingly, India's reintegration coincides with the onset of the arger process of globalization.
However, carried out in stealth, conomic liberalization, the national policy counterpart of glob lization, remained tentative and minimal in India.
Not until 991 did India, amidst enormous economic crisis, make a para igm shift to liberalization, though still limited.
mpirical comparison of the period before and after liberal zation demonstrates that, instead of economic stagnation, India chieved a marked acceleration in economic growth after liberal- HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE zation.
Indeed, India broke the barrier of stagnation that had een the lot of the country before globalization.
India's rate of rowth from 1975 to 2007 has been over 5.5 percent, compared to he derisively termed "Hindu" rate of growth of 3.4 percent over he period 1956 to 1975, and especially to the pathetic 2.6 percent ver the decade prior to the nascent liberalization in 1975.
In the ozen years from 1995 to 2007 the growth rate has been over 6.5 ercent; during the last four years India has sustained an un recedented average growth rate of over 8 percent.
It has provided additional resources not only for in estment in human capital but also for expenditures on the social ectors and poverty alleviation.
imilarly, far from the specter of deindustrialization held out y the critics, foreign imports have not swamped Indian industry fter tariffs were lowered as part of India's reintegration into the orld economy.
Rather, Indian industry has grown at a higher ate than it had prior to liberalization of the economy.
Indeed, throughout that en ire period, India labored under an enormous and debilitating oreign-exchange constraint, which both retarded and distorted its  H E W O R L D IS F L A T evelopment.
After the paradigm shift to economic liberaliza ion in the early 1990s, India has not yet seen another economic risis and no longer faces a foreign-exchange constraint be ause of its accumulating reserves, currently at some $170 billion.
s for impoverishment, the globalization period has seen wel are enhancement through a long-term decline in poverty.
The roportion of population below the poverty line was 55 percent in 973, after which there has occurred a secular decline.
The line of causality here clearly runs from global zation and liberalization to acceleration in the growth rate and hen to poverty reductiona remarkable testimony to the robust ess of the much-maligned "trickle down theory."
till, it would be heartless, indeed cruel, to make the perfor ance on poverty reduction an occasion to celebrate liberaliza ion, as much poverty still remains, even when defined minimally n caloric-intake terms.
Indeed, the persistence of poverty for mas ive numbers, inherited from the past, underscores the passion hat goes into critiques of globalization.
However, the conclusion hat flows from a comparative analysis of the trends since the be inning of liberalization in 1975 when set against the condition rior to it, of staggeringly high poverty and economic stagna ionis different.
Higher rates of economic growth, facilitated by eriodic doses of liberalization, pushed forward poverty reduc ion.
C]ontrary to the position of the critics, globalization has ewed as the agent of deliverance for India from economic stag ation and perpetual economic crises even as it has reduced overty.
However, India continues to be dogged by deep-seated ocietal problems that persisted throughout the autarkic period.
And when I see large numbers of people escaping poverty, in laces like India, China, or Ireland, well, yes, I get a little emotional.
Just as ndividuals need a strategy for coping with the flattening of the world, so oo do companies.
What I have learned n researching this book, though, is that the companies that have man-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ged to survive and grow today are those that are most prepared to hange.
his chapter highlights some of the rules that these companies live y in a flat world.
his rule should come as no surprise: When, as a result of the flattening f the world, so many people have so much connectivity, and so many eople have access to low-cost tools of innovation, and so many people re able to tap into each other's markets, workforces, brainpower, and deas to discover and invent new thingsand then quickly disseminate hem around the globewell, then, whatever can be done will be done.
see evidence of this everywhere I go todayindividuals, entre reneurs, and big companies mixing and mashing together all sorts of echnologies, markets, and innovations to start new businesses out of no here or give old businesses some totally new dimension.
It was something former secretary f state James A. Baker III used to say after he retired from government: n Washington, you know you're out of o f f i c e "when your limousine is yel ow and your driver speaks Farsi."
One day our tour guide, Alfredo Ferreyros, mentioned a eruvian friend of his who was selling traditional handcrafted Peruvian ishware from his village near Cuzco "on the Internet."
I am glad e-commerce is getting down to Peruvian illages."
But then Alfredo added this kicker: His friend was looking into hether he could get his traditional Peruvian ceramics made more heaply in China and have them shipped directly to the United States rom there!
he New Yorker ran a cartoon by Peter Steiner of two dogs, one sitting t a computer keyboard saying to the other, "On the Internet, nobody nows you're a dog."
tiny country of 3.4 million people, wedged between Brazil and rgentina, Uruguay has come from nowhere to partner with India's big est software company, Tata Consultancy Services, to create in just five ears one of the largest outsourcing operations in Latin America.
Yes, hen Tata's Indian employees in Mumbai are asleep, its 650 Uruguayan  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ngineers and programmers now pick up the work and help run the omputers and backroom operations for the likes of American Express, rocter & Gamble, and some major U.S. banksall from Montevideo.
A retired partner from Ernst & Young in America who was raised n Uruguay, he hatched the idea of partnering with Tata to make ontevideo a global outsourcing hub.
He had just two things: a gut in tinct that Uruguay's quality educational system had produced plenty f good, low-cost engineers and a gut desire to do something good for ruguaythe country that gave his Hungarian parents sanctuary from itler.
(Rozman also oversees thirteen hundred employees n Brazil and twelve hundred in Chile.)
It turns out that many multina ionals like the idea of spreading out their risks and not having all their utsourcing done from India especially after one big U.S. bank nearly ad to shut down last year when a flood in Mumbai paralyzed its India ata center the same day a hurricane paralyzed its Florida operation.
And here is no risk of nuclear war with Pakistan in Uruguay, either.
When I first approached this big U.S. bank to outsource some of its ervices to Montevideo, instead of India," recalled Rozman, "the guy I as speaking with said, 'I don't even know where Montevideo is.'
Another factor, added Rozman, was that ultinationals that were depending on Indian firms alone to run their ack rooms twenty-four hours a day were getting the third team for eight ours, since the best Indian engineers didn't want to work the late-night hiftthe heart of America's day.
By creating an outsourcing center in ontevideo, which is just one hour ahead of New York, Tata could offer ts clients its best Indian engineers during India's day (America's night) nd its best Uruguayan engineers during America's day (India's night).
OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ost employees here are Uruguayans, but there are also lots of Indians ent over by Tata.
It produces both a culture shockMontevideo doesn't ave one Indian restaurantand a cultural cacophony.
The firm runs n strict Tata principles, as if it were in Mumbai, so to see Uruguayans retending to be Indians serving Americans is quite a scene.
Rosina armion, twenty-seven, an Uruguayan manager, explained, "Our cus omers expect us to behave like Indians, to react the same way."
In today's world, having an Indian com any led by a Hungarian-Uruguayan C E O , servicing American banks ith Montevidean engineers managed by Indian technologists who have earned to eat Uruguayan veggie is just the new normal.
ne day in the spring of 2006 I was interviewing B. Ramalinga Raju, hairman of Satyam Computer Services, one of India's top firms doing utsourced work from America, and he mentioned in passing how atyam had just started outsourcing some of its American work to Indian illages.
Raju ex lained: "We told ourselves: If business process outsourcing can be done rom cities in India to support cities in the developed world, why can't it e done by villages in India to support cities in India?
There is enough bandwidth now, ven reaching big Indian villages, to parcel out this work, and the vil agers are very eager.
n the fall of 2006,1 visited South Sioux City, Nebraska, where I met oug Palmer.
Their company, Lite-Form, found a South Korean achine that, when combined with devices added by his firm, can make he foam and concrete together on site, saving big dollars in trucking.
oday, the South Sioux City company imports these machines from South orea, attaches its devices, and exports them to Kuwait.
His company has n Arabic brochure that tells Kuwaitis how to use the device.
The brochure  H E W O R L D IS F L A T as produced by a local ad agency owned by the Winnebago Indian tribe f Nebraska.
You read this right: Plains Indians publishing Arabic rochures for Nebraskans who are importing machinery from Koreans to e customized by a South Sioux City company for customers in Kuwait.
In fact, free trade is critical for small businesses and individuals, ho can now act multinationally.
few weeks later, in Silicon Valley, I met Arijit Sengupta, a young ndian American educated at Stanford and Harvard Business School, hose company, BeyondCore, developed a software algorithm to be able o detect and reduce errors in outsourced back-office work.
When I met r. Sengupta, he handed me a card with his logo, which, he explained, as designed by a graphic artist he found online in Romania through a eb site that brings together freelancers from all over the world.
He put is need for a design out for bid on the site, got a bunch of proposals from rgentina, India, Italy, Malaysia, New Zealand, Romania, Ukraine, ruguay, and the United States, chose the best one, and a few hundred ollars and a few days later had his own corporate logo for his business ard.
His database and Web server were drawn from free software, his log and part of his Web site were hosted for free by Google, and he had utsourced his marketing, sales support, and patent filings to Indian irms.
he held up his BlackBerry, hich took calls forwarded from phone numbers he set up in India, oston, and Palo Alto.
OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E emember: Small business is the engine of employment, and this latter world is clearly igniting a new era for small businesses to dream, reate, and sellno matter how small they are.
On Alibaba, he found someone in China to design the arphones and someone else to produce them.
hat all these stories tell me is that, thanks to the flat-world platform, e are seeing the emergence of collaborative, build-your-own business odels that are unprecedented in historyand that whatever can be one is being done.
es, of course, companies still compete with one another and always ill.
The countries and companies hat will thrive will be those which create an environment where their eople can stretch their imaginations to the horizon and beyond, and urn their visions into new products and services.
What the above stories  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ave in common is that the products and services provided by these in ividualsor by the companies they starteddid not previously exist.
hat is one reason we need to ignore those in America who would ad ocate putting up higher walls of protectionism today or restricting free rade.
And pardon me also when I hear people say, Britain dominated the nineteenth century, America dominated the wentieth century, and China will dominate the twenty-first century," OW OMPANIES COPE nd I respond, "Not so fast."
Maybe China will become the dominant conomic power in the twenty-first century, but maybe not.
I am not eady to cede the twenty-first century to China just yet.
But we are ot automatically going to be roadkill for China, either.
In China they ensor Google, and censoring Google is a proxy for a lot of impediments nd restrictions to imagining and doing whatever can be done.
hat is why I like to joke that my grandmother in Minnesota used to it in her rocking chair by the fire during those cold Minnesota winters nd impart to me this bit of wisdom that guides me to this day: Tommy," she would say, "never cede a century to a country that cen ors Google."
ule #3: And the small shall act big ... One way small companies flour sh in the flat world is by learning to act really big.
can think of no better way to illustrate this rule than to tell the story of nother friend, Fadi Ghandour, the cofounder and C E O of Aramex, he first home-grown package delivery service in the Arab world and he first and only Arab company to be listed on the Nasdaq.
Originally rom Lebanon, Ghandour's family moved to Jordan in the 1960s, where is father, Ali, founded Royal Jordanian Airlines.
Shortly after graduating from eorge Washington University in Washington, D.C., Ghandour re urned home and saw a niche business he thought he could develop: e and an American cofounder, William Kingson, raised some money nd in 1982 started a mini-Federal Express to do parcel delivery for the iddle East.
Ghandour's and Kingson's brainstorm was to approach  H E W O R L D IS F L A T merican companies, like Federal Express and Airborne Express, that id not have a Middle East presence and offer to become their local de ivery service, playing on the fact that an Arab company would know the egion and how to get around unpleasantries like Arab-Israeli clashes, the ran-Iraq war, and the American invasion of Iraq.
" said Ghandour, in laying ut for me the whole Aramex story.
Airborne re ponded positively, and Ghandour used that to build his own business nd then buy up or partner with small delivery firms from Egypt to Turkey o Saudi Arabia and later all the way over to India, Pakistan, and Iran reating his own regional network.
Airborne did not have the money that ederal Express was investing in setting up its own operations in every re ion of the globe, so it created an alliance, bringing together some forty egional delivery companies, like Aramex, into a virtual global network.
With his com any headquartered in Amman, Jordan, Ghandour tapped into the irborne system by leasing a data line that was connected from Amman ll the way to Airborne's big mainframe computer in its headquarters n Seattle.
Through dumb terminals back in the Middle East, Aramex racked and traced its packages using Airborne's back room.
Aramex, in act, was the earliest adopter of the Airborne system.
o these Jordanians, all of whom spoke English, went off to places like weden and the Far East and taught the Airborne methods of tracking OW C O M P A N I E S OPE nd tracing.
Eventually, Airborne bought 9 percent of Aramex to cement he relationship.
he arrangement worked well for everyone, and Aramex came to ominate the parcel delivery market in the Arab world, so well that in 997, Ghandour decided to take the company public on Broadway, also nown as the Nasdaq.
Aramex continued to grow into a nearly $200million-a-year company, with thirty-two hundred employeesand with ut any big government contracts.
Because of the dot-com oom, which deflected interest from brick-and-mortar companies like ramex, and then the dot-com bust, which knocked out the Nasdaq, ramex's stock price never really took off.
Thinking that the market sim ly did not appreciate its value, Ghandour, along with a private equity irm from Dubai, bought the company back from its shareholders in arly 2002. nbeknownst to Ghandour, this move coincided with the flattening f the world.
ut Ghandour also came with a proposal: "I told them that Aramex was eveloping the software in Jordan to replace the Airborne tracking and racing system, and I promised everyone there that our system would be p and running before Airborne switched theirs off."
To do his, he told the prospective partners that he would hire Jordanian pro essionals to manage all the alliance's back-office needs at a fraction f the cost they were paying to have it all done from Europe or America.
I am not the largest company in the group," said Ghandour, who is ow in his midforties and still full of energy, "but I took leadership.
irst of all, a young generation of Jordanian software and industrial ngineers had just come of age and walked out onto the level playing ield.
They found that all the collaborative tools they needed to act big ere as available to them as to Airborne's employees in Seattle.
It was just  question of having the energy and imagination to adopt these tools and ut them to good use.
With he Web, said Ghandour, every employee in every alliance company ould access the Aramex tracking and tracing system through smart PC erminals or handheld devices, using the Internet and wireless.
A couple f months after making his proposal in London, Ghandour brought all he would-be partners together in Amman to show them the proprietary ystem that Aramex was developing and to meet some of his Jordanian oftware professionals and industrial engineers.
(Some of the program ing was being done in-house at Aramex and some was outsourced.
utsourcing meant Aramex too could tap the best brains.)
The partners iked it, and thus the Global Distribution Alliance was bornwith ramex providing the back room from the backwater of Amman, where OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E awrence of Arabia once prowled, replacing Airborne, which was lo ated just down the highway from Microsoft and Bill Gates.
"I could go right to the Internet and use the latest technologies," e said.
hen January 2004 rolled around and Airborne began switching off ts system, Aramex was up and running for a seamless handoff.
And be ause Aramex was able to run its new system off an Internet platform, ith software designed primarily by lower-cost Jordanian programmers, nstallation of the new system took place virtually, without Aramex hav ng to send its engineers to train any of the alliance partners.
Each part er company could build its own client base over the Internet through he Aramex system, do its own tracking and tracing, and be part of the ew virtual global air freight network.
We saved so much money... With our Web-based system all you eeded was a browser and a password to get into the Aramex network, and uddenly you're inside a global shipment management system."
Aramex rained many of the employees of the other alliance companies how to se its system by using various online channels, including voice over the nternet, online chatting, and other virtual training tools available on ramex's intranetmaking the training incredibly cheap.
ike UPS, Aramex has quickly moved into insourcing.
Arab and for ign banks in the Middle East have outsourced the delivery of their redit cards to Aramex; mobile phone companies are using Aramex deliverymen to collect bills on their behalf, with the deliverymen just scan ing the customer's credit card and then issuing a receipt.
(Aramex may  H E W O R L D IS F L A T e high-tech, but it has not shrunk from using donkeys to cross military oadblocks to deliver packages in the West Bank when Israeli-Palestinian lashes have closed roads.)
That is not how Aramex orks.
Every single knowledge worker in this organization as a computer with e-mail and Internet access.
n sum, Fadi Ghandour took advantage of several new forms of ollaborationsupply-chaining, outsourcing, insourcing, and all the teroidsto make his little $200-million-a-year company very big.
ule #4: And the big shall act small... One way that big companies learn o flourish in the flat world is by learning how to act really small by en bling their customers to act really big.
oward Schultz, the founder and chairman of Starbucks, says that tarbucks estimates that it is possible to make nineteen thousand varia ions of coffee on the basis of the menus posted at any Starbucks outlet.
hat Starbucks did, in other words, was make its customers its drink de igners and allow them to customize their drinks to their exact specifica ions.
Starbucks never thought of offering soy milk, Schultz told me, ntil store managers started to get bombarded with demands for it from ustomers, to the point where they were going to the grocery store across he street in the middle of the day to buy cartons of soy milk.
Starbucks earned from its customers, and today some 8 percent of all the drinks hat Starbucks sells include soy milk.
Starbucks ust collaborated with them.
The smartest big companies clearly under tand that the triple convergence allows them to collaborate with their OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ustomers in a totally new fashionand, by doing so, to act really small.
he way that big companies act small is not by targeting each individual onsumer and trying to serve that customer individually.
These companies create a plat orm that allows individual customers to serve themselves in their own ay, at their own pace, in their own time, according to their own tastes.
ne of those big companies that have learned to act small in this way s E Trade, the online bank and brokerage house.
"Some people hought the Internet was going to revolutionize everything in the world ith no limitsit was going to cure the common cold," said Caplan.
But meanwhile, with much less fanfare, he Internet was creating "a whole new distribution platform for compa ies to reach consumers in a whole new way and for consumers to reach our company in a whole new way," Caplan said.
"While we were sleep ng, my mom figured out how to use e-mail and connect with the kids.
ompanies that were paying attention understood they were witness ng the birth of the "self-directed consumer," because the Internet and all he other tools of the flat world had created a means for every consumer o customize exactly the price, experience, and service he or she wanted.
ig companies that could adapt their technology and business processes o empower this self-directed consumer could act very small by enabling heir customers to act very big.
Historically, financial services were dominated by large anks, large brokerage houses, and large insurance companies that told ou what you were getting, how you were getting it, when and where you ere getting it, and the price you had to pay for it.
Customers reacted to hese big companies with emotions ranging from apathy to distaste.
Then the world was flattened and the Internet came along.
onsumers started to feel that they could have more control, and the ore they adapted their buying habits to the Internet, the more compa iesfrom booksellers to financial serviceshad to adapt and offer hem the tools to be in control.
Sure, the Internet stocks blew up when the bubble burst," said aplan, whose own company's stock price took a big dip in that market torm, "but underneath, consumers were getting a taste of power, and nce they tasted it, things went from companies being in control of con umers' behavior to consumers being in control of companies' behavior.
Where once the financial services companies acted big, now they trove to act small and to enable the consumer to act big.
ule # 5 : The best companies are the best collaborators.
In the flat world, ore and more business will be done through collaborations within and etween companies, for a very simple reason: The next layers of value cre tionwhether in technology, marketing, biomedicine, or manufactur ngare becoming so complex that no single firm or department is going o be able to master them alone.
The cutting dge of technical innovation in every field is increasingly specialized."
In ost cases, your own company's or your own department's specialization s going to be applicable to only a very small piece of any meaningful usiness or social challenge.
r take a more colorful example: video games.
So some big ame companies have recently started their own music divisions, and ome artists have decided that they have a better chance of getting their usic heard by launching it with a new digital game than on the radio.
s I noted earlier, many of the new middle jobs will go to people who re great synthesizersbecause the more the flattening of the world con ects all the knowledge pools together, the more new specialties will be pawned, and the more innovation will come from putting these special ies together in new and different combinations.
In the ime magazine cover story (October 24, 2005) on Steve Jobs and the pple video iPod, one paragraph jumped out at me.
Managers lsewhere boast about what little time they waste in meetings; Apple is ig on them and proud of it.
'When the challenges are that omplex, you have to develop a product in a more collaborative, inte rated way.'
" erhaps the best way to illustrate this paradigm shift is to show how a ery traditional manufacturerRolls-Roycehas adapted to it.
When ou hear the word "Rolls-Royce," what immediately comes to mind is a hiny handmade car, with a uniformed chauffeur sitting in the driver's eat and a perfectly tailored couple in the back on their way to Ascot or imbledon.
Rolls-Royce, the quintessential stodgy British company, ight?
What if I told you, though, that Rolls-Royce doesn't even make ars anymore (that business was sold in 1972 and the brand was licensed o B M W in 1998), that 50 percent of its income comes from services, nd that in 1990 all of its employees were in Great Britain and today 40 OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ercent are based outside of the United Kingdom, integrated into a lobal operation that stretches from China to Singapore to India to Italy o Spain to Germany to Japan and up to Scandinavia?
o, this is not your father's Rolls-Royce.
Quite a long time ago we said, 'We cannot be just a U.K. company,' " ir John Rose, chief executive of Rolls-Royce PLC, told me in an inter iew while we were both visiting China.
Half of Rolls-Royce's revenue is ow generated by businesses outside the United Kingdom.
"In the U.K. e are thought of as a British company," said Rose, "but in Germany we re a German company.
In America we are an American company, in ingapore we are a Singaporean companyyou have to be in order to e close to the customer but also to the suppliers, employees, and com unities in which we operate."
Today Rolls-Royce employs people of bout fifty nationalities in fifty countries speaking about fifty languages.
ut outside of these core areas, Rolls-Royce has adopted a much ore horizontal approach to outsourcing noncore components to sup liers anywhere in the world, and to seeking out IQ far beyond the ritish Isles.
The sun may have set on the British Empire, and it used to et on the old Rolls-Royce.
But it never sets on the new Rolls-Royce.
And to be able to commercialize the ext energy frontierfuel cell technologywill require that even more.
One of the core competencies of the business today is partnering," said ose.
decade ago, he added, "We did 98 percent of our research and tech ology in the U.K. and now we do less than 40 percent in the U.K. Now e do it as well in the U.S., Germany, India, Scandinavia, Japan, ingapore, Spain, and Italy.
hen Rolls-Royce was a U.K.-centric company, he added, it was very ertically organized.
"But we had to flatten ourselves," said Rose, as more nd more markets opened worldwide that Rolls-Royce could sell into nd from which it could extract knowledge.
his approach to change that Rolls-Royce has perfected in response o the flattening of the world is going to become the standard for more nd more new start-up companies.
Which is why in the flat world, more nd more companies are now being born global.
And if you are a multiproduct company, you are probably going o have some manufacturing relationships in Malaysia and China, some esign in Taiwan, some customer support in India and the Philippines, nd possibly some engineering in Russia and the U.S." These are the socalled micromultinationals, and they are the wave of the future.
oday, your first management job out of business school could be elding the specialties of a knowledge team that is one-third in India, ne-third in China, and a sixth each in Palo Alto and Boston.
ule #6: In a flat world, the best companies stay healthy by getting regular hest X-rays and then selling the results to their clients.
ecause niche businesses can get turned into vanilla commodity busi esses faster than ever in a flat world, the best companies today really do et chest X-rays regularlyto constantly identify and strengthen their iches and outsource the stuff that is not very differentiating.
What do I ean by chest X-rays?
first got interested in this phenomenon when an Internet business ews headline caught my eye: "HP bags $150 million India bank con ract."
The story on Computerworld.com (February 25, 2004) quoted a tatement by HP saying that it had inked a ten-year outsourcing contract ith the Bank of India in Mumbai.
The $150 million contract was the OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E argest ever won by HP Services in the Asia-Pacific region, according to atarajan Sundaram, head of marketing for HP Services India.
The deal alled for HP to implement and manage a core banking system across 750 ank of India branches.
Several multinational companies competed for the contract, ncluding IBM.
Under the contract, HP would take charge of data ware ousing and document-imaging technology, telebanking, Internet bank ng, and automated teller machines for the whole bank chain.
ther stories explained that the Bank of India had been facing increas ng competition from both public- and private-sector banks and multina ional corporations.
till, when the Bank of India decides to outsource its back room to an merican-owned computer company, well, that just seemed too weird or words.
"HP, the folks  call when my printer breaks, won the outsourcing contract for manag ng the back room of India's 750-branch state-owned bank?
What in the orld does Hewlett-Packard know about running the backroom systems f an Indian bank?"
In brief, she ex lained, HP is constantly hosting customer visits, where its corporate lients come to its headquarters and see the innovations that HP has rought to managing its own information systems.
How, they ask, did HP, which once had eighty-seven different upply chains each managed vertically and independently, with its own  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ierarchy of managers and back-office supportcompress them into just ive supply chains that manage $50 billion in business, and in which unctions like accounting, billing, and human resources are handled hrough a companywide system?
Just n the last couple of years, HP created three transaction-processing ubsin Bangalore, Barcelona, and Guadalajarawith uniform stan ards and special work flow software that allowed HP offices in all 178 ountries to process all billing functions through these three hubs.
Said Conway, That became the nucleus of our business process outsourcing ser ice .
We were doing our own chest X-rays and discovered we had as ets that other people cared about, and that is a business."
n other words, the flattening of the world was both the disease and he cure for the Bank of India.
It clearly could not keep up with its com etitors in the flattening banking environment of India, and, at the same ime, it was able to get a chest X-ray and then outsource to HP all those hings that it no longer made sense to do itself.
Sure, most of the work for the Bank of India will e done by HP employees in India or Bank of India employees who will ctually join HP.
ost of HP's revenues today come from outside the United States.
ut the core HP knowledge and infrastructure teams who can put to ether the processes that win those contractslike running the back oom of the Bank of India are still in the United States.
OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ule #7: The best companies outsource to win, not to shrink.
s noted earlier, Dov Seidman runs LRN, a business that provides on ine legal, compliance, and ethics education to employees of global ompanies and helps executives and board members manage corporate overnance responsibilities.
We were having lunch in the fall of 2004 hen Seidman casually mentioned that he had recently signed an out ourcing contract with the Indian consulting firm MindTree.
I am outsourcing to win, not to save money," Seidman answered.
eidman's experience is what most outsourcing is actually about ompanies outsourcing to acquire knowledge talent to grow their busi ess faster, not simply to cut costs and cut back.
Although LRN s a BE companyfounded ten years before Enron exploded demand or its services surged in the PE erapost-Enron.
In the wake of the col apse of Enron and other corporate governance scandals, a lot more ompanies became interested in what LRN was offeringonline pro rams for companies to forge common expectations and understandings f their legal and ethical responsibilities, from the boardroom to the fac ory floor.
When companies sign up with LRN, their employees are iven an online education, including tests that cover everything from our company's code of conduct to when you are allowed to accept a gift o what you need to think about before hitting Send on an e-mail to what onstitutes a bribe of a foreign official.
While it was great that e was educating their employees with one online curriculum and ad ising boards on ethics issues with another, he knew that company exec tives would want a one-stop Web-based interface where they could et a handle on all the governance and ethics issues facing their organiza ionswhether it was employee education, the reporting of any anomalous ehavior, stewardship of a hard-earned corporate reputation, or govern ent complianceand where they could get immediate visibility into here their company stood.
It was when faced with this challenge that he de ided to enlist MindTree, the Indian consulting firm, in an outsourced elationship that offered him about five well-qualified software engineers or the price of one in America.
Look," said Seidman, "when things are on sale, you tend to buy ore. MindTree offered a sale not on last season's closeout, but on topnotch software engineering talent that I would have been hard-pressed to ind elsewhere.
I needed to spend a lot of money defending and extend ng my core business and continue to take care of my customers, who ere working off my current programs.
Partnering with MindTree allows me to basi ally have two teamsone team [mostly Americans] that is focused on efending and extending our core business, and the other team, includ ng our Indian consultants, focused on making our next strategic leap to row our business."
ince ethics is at the core of Seidman's Los Angeles-headquartered usiness, how he went about outsourcing was as important as the ulti ate results of the relationship.
Rather than announcing the MindTree artnership as a done deal, Seidman conducted an all-hands town-hall OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E eeting of his 170 or so employees to discuss the outsourcing he had in ind.
But irms that are using outsourcing primarily as a tool to cut costs, not enhance innovation and speed growth, are the minority, not the majority nd I would not want to own stock in any of them.
The best companies re finding ways to leverage the best of what is in India with the best f what is in North Dakota with the best of what is in Los Angeles.
In hat sense, the word "outsourcing" should really be retired.
That is what the flat world both enables and demands, and the companies that do sourcing right end up ith bigger market shares and more employees everywhere not smaller nd fewer.
This [decision to use outsourcing] is all about playing offense, not defense.
After all, how much difference is there today among arget, Kmart, Wal-Mart, and Costco, or Nordstrom, Saks, and Nieman arcus?
he other reason is that companies today are more transparentand heir customers more powerful.
Little guys and gals can now alk back in ways the whole world can hearby blogging or podcasting bout your company or by mocking your product on YouTube with a ideo that can be downloaded all over the world.
Customers can not only talk back, they can look nto the very workings of your business and decide if you conduct your elf in a way they approve of.
oing to India gave me an inkling that the world was flat, but only when  went back to my roots and spoke to my friends from Minnesota did I ealize just how flat.
"We are now competing gainst freelancers!
We never really competed against freelancers before.
In the last onth we have lost three jobs to freelance solo practitioners who used to ork for good companies and have experience and then just went out on heir own.
t's called commoditization, and in the wake of the triple conver ence, it is happening faster and faster across a whole range of industries.
ortunately, Greer responded to commoditization by opting for the nly survival strategy that works: a shovel, not a wall.
He and his associates ug inside themselves to locate the company's real core competency, and his has become the primary energy source propelling their business for ard in the flat world.
n the old days, said Greer, many companies "hid behind technology.
s the flattening phase of globalization began to gain momentum fol owing the fall of the Berlin Wall, there was a considerable and justi iable worry around the world that "globalization means Americanization."
Primarily because of uploading.
The fact that so many people worldwide now ave the tools to create and upload their own contenttheir own news re orts, their own opinions, their own music, their own videos, their own pho os, their own software, their own encyclopedias, their own dictionaries s a very powerful force for the preservation and enhancement of cultural utonomy and particularity.
The flat-world platform enables you to take our own local culture and upload it to the world.
You can now make your own home video with a cheap Webcam nd Microsoft Movie Maker that comes bundled with your software and pload that as well.
So Japan has sushi pizza LOBALIZATION OF T H E LOCAL nd Bangkok has Thai pizza and Lebanon has mezze pizza.
t the same time, the fact that people in rising nations like India and hina will be able to innovate without having to emigrate means that lo al cultures have a much better chance of being preserved.
A young ndian engineer no longer has to stand in line outside the U.S. embassy n New Delhi and pray to win the lottery and secure a visa to America so hat he or she can move to frigid Minnesota and give up his or her native ress, native cuisine, native music, and extended familyall the things hat make up a native culture just to get a decent engineering job at M. That is a very good thing for the preservation of Indian local culture.
Thanks to their abil ty to read their local newspapers online, to communicate with family nd friends by phone for almost nothing using voice over the Internet echnology, to watch daily news from Cairo or Calcutta (in Arabic and indi) thanks to Internet or satellite TV, the forces of particularization ow seem to be as strong as the forces of homogenization.
But somehow, more than a ecade after the fall of the Berlin Wall, it no longer seems inevitable that veryone is going to look, speak, sing, dance, and think like an American ecause of globalization.
s it happens, "globalization of the local" is an expression I first saw sed by an Indian-born expert on globalization and cultural identity, ndrajit Banerjee, the secretary general of the Asian Media Information  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nd Communication Centre (AMIC).
In an interview with Felix Soh of he Straits Times of Singapore (September 11, 2005), Banerjee ex lained that he coined the term to describe the phenomenon that allows iaspora communities around the world to use today's global media net orks to cling to their local mores, news, traditions, and friends no atter where they are living.
This phenomenon of the globalization of the local is eing driven by the demand for local news and information from Asia's iasporas, notably the millions of Chinese and Indian emigres now living n all parts of the world."
anerjee, who has a Ph.D. in communications from the Sorbonne, in aris, sees this from his perch in Singapore, where he teaches at a university: One would think that globalization in Asia would mean going English, but hat's not the case," he said in the interview with The Straits Times.
oday Britain and the United States have television channels where the rogramming is all in Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, or Japanese.
oh pointed out that Zee TV, the biggest Indian entertainment net ork, had blazed a trail for other Indian T V channels to go regional in sia.
Said Banerjee: "Zee T V has a very clear Indian marketit is the ndian diaspora.
Its programming is in Hindi.
For Zee TV, competition s really not an issue.
This, together with the rich culture and heritage of Asia, pre- LOBALIZATION OF THE LOCAL ents the region with tremendous potential to be a content-trading hub.
South Korea and Japan are very strong in anima ion .
ndia, for instance, has exploded recently as a platform for the out ourcing of game designs and cartoon animation.
I was struck by some hing the head of one of these companies said to me when I visited.
Ashish ulkarni, COO of JadooWorks in Bangalore, explained that India had an bundance of traditional artists, who were able to make the transition eas ly to computerized digital painting.
"We train them to transform their raditional skills to animation in a digital format," said Kulkarni.
But to eep up their traditional Indian painting skills, JadooWorks also had set side a room where artists could retreat to indulge in their native artistry ecause the two skills reinforce each other.
Companies like JadooWorks ome and go with the demands of the global market and who can offer he best, cheapest artists at any given time.
But before the world got flat, ndia had virtually no companies doing this business at all.
Now, a new eneration of Indian artists at least has a chance to maintain or advance heir skills rather than drive taxis to earn a living.
"We now tell the parents: If your kids are doing well in drawing in seventh grade, you must think of aking a career in animation,'" said Kulkarni.
I interviewed Deepak Ganguly, a slender twenty-eight-year-old omputer artist who was then working at JadooWorks.
"My father was a car et designer, he made designs for Indian carpets.
hen I started this animation career, at the time 3-D [computers for draw ng] were not here in India .
So I did a course in 2-D classical animation nd I was a 2-D animator.
When this 3-D boom happened in India [in the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ast couple years], I decided to jump.
It is a much roader, deeper, and more complex phenomenon, involving new forms f communication and innovation.
It is about the global market, but it s also about the Internet and Google.
he kind of globalization we are talking about nowwith the nternet and the flattening of the world"is a different kind of globaliza ion than the one that is in the minds of the people who have been criti izing globalization," remarked Israeli political theorist Yaron Ezrahi.
And the same, unfortunately, is true ith neo-Nazis and al-Qaeda sympathizers.
But the fact is that the Internet has magnified the ca acity of individuals to generate their own stories and inscribe themselves n the world, both as individuals and as part of communities.
s of the printing of this book, Google was available in 116 different anguages, from Arabic to Zulu to several versions of Chinese.
ut the flattening of the world is bringing diversity to different corners f the world, even without the Internet.
The Ghana-born Princeton rofessor and philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah expressed this well in n essay for The New York Times Magazine (January 1, 2006) titled "The  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ase for Contamination."
Using a visit to his mother in Kumasi, hanathe town he grew up inhe adduced a variety of examples to ake the point that people in Africa today, even villagers, are not just ob ects that the West or the modern world inscribes itself upon.
he newest anti-homogenizing force is podcastinga whole new tool or globalizing the local.
I got a glimpse into this phenomenon in ctober 2005 when I visited a small apartment in suburban Shanghai hat is home to China's leading podcasting Web site, Toodou.com.
Any Chinese can reate his or her own channel of video or audio content on Toodou, and ther individuals sign up to get the content on that channel each time LOBALIZATION OF THE LOCAL ew material is uploaded.
And he will, because the ease of ploading and podcasting means there are almost no barriers to entry, as ong as you have a computer, a camera, and a microphone.
(There are till political limits on what you can say from China, but who knows how ong those limits will be sustainable.
oodou's most popular podcast when I visited was a video of two wenty-year-old Chinese women lip-synching a popular Cantonese rock une.
"They got bored," explained Wang, so they went out and bought heir own Webcam (which can be found in Shanghai for the equivalent f $6), used Microsoft Movie Maker (software that comes bundled with indows XP), made their own three-minute MTV-like podcast, and up oaded it onto Toodou.com.
nother favorite is a podcast by two Chinese architecture students earing Houston Rockets jerseys (the team of Chinese-born NBA star ao Ming) and lip-synching a Backstreet Boys tune.
A slide show on life n Shenzhen had been viewed sixteen thousand times, prompting all sorts f accompanying commentary from viewers around China.
Very few Chinese have ever ven seen an iPod, so most of the podcasting that does exist here is  H E W O R L D IS F L A T reated and viewed or heard on PCs.
Once the price of an iPod (music r video) comes down, though, there will be a huge podcast market here.
The ease of podcasting will force competition and experimen ation.
Wang first heard of podcasting only in 2004.
Some thirteen onths later he had the most popular podcasting site in China, with one undred thousand registered users, eight employees, forty volunteers, nd a U.S. venture capital backer.
lmost all the software that runs Toodou.com is from free, open-source aterial on the Weban Apache Webserver; FreeBSD, a free Unix op rating system; MySQL, a free database system; and PHP, free program ing language.
omparing China to America and Europe, where he studied, Wang aid, "With the same amount of money, I can do ten times more here .
n China, the combination of low costs and lowered barriers is making he process of creating cultural content cheaper and as a result more pop lar.
That's why I am confident that this flattening phase of globalization s not going to mean more Americanization, but more globalization of lo al cultures, art forms, styles, recipes, literature, videos, and opinions  ore and more local content made global.
Only China's newest Cultural Revolution is going to be driven his time from the bottom upthanks to the flat-world platformby odcasters with Apple's little white iPods, not from the top down by aoists with Little Red Books.
More and more hinese, Indian, Brazilian, Russian, Asian, and even African companies re doing business globally.
he Davos World Economic Forum is always a useful barometer of lobal trends, and at Davos 2007, for the first time, I began to really feel he globalization of the local happening in business to a significant de ree.
Shafik's company, the Artoc Group for Investment nd Development, was involved in building two new cities in Egypt from he ground up, but that's not what struck me most.
He explained to me that he had just hired as his new group OO an American of Egyptian origin who had worked for Coca-Cola n Atlanta, London, and Africa; he had hired an American Asia expert ased in Hong Kong as his vice chairman for policy and business devel pment; and he had hired a Frenchman as group general manager for is real estate subsidiary.
A week later (January 31, 2007), the Financial Times carried the ollowing lead story: "Tata Steel of India won the batde to control AngloDutch steelmaker Corus on Wednesday, after more than eight hours f head-to-head bidding against Companhia Siderurgica Nacional of razil."
This was the first large foreign acquisition by an Indian company, nd it was a doozy  6.2 billion to take over Corus, which owns almost he entire steel industries of Britain and the Netherlands.
So an Indian ompany outbid a Brazilian company to take over the biggest steel com anies in Britain and the Netherlands!
n the middle of the Davos forum, Nathan Gardels, editor of Global iewpoint magazine, wrote an essay for the International Herald Tribune  H E W O R L D IS F L A T January 24, 2007) that summarized these trends: "Globalization now elongs to everyone who can figure out how to take advantage of its op ortunities and minimize its dislocations.
HIRTEEN f If s Not Happening, t's Because You're Not Doing It   I came into the office in the morning and I turned on my com uter and suddenly I found five thousand e-mails waiting for me, ll with the same basic complaint, all stirred up by the same orga ization that I'd never heard of beforesome little group with a Web site n Canada run by two people, a dog, and $10,000.
"These people" are this eneration's social activists and social entrepreneurs, who have been uperempowered by the flattening of the world.
The Internet today gives ven the smallest groups the ability to upload and globalize their ac ivismby building global coalitions that expose or embarrass the iggest multinationals.
If these guys or gals use the Internet and the flat orld to mount a campaign that is bogus or dishonest, it won't have any asting impact.
realized just how much social entrepreneurs can affect business de isions when I picked up The New York Times (March 8, 2007) and read hat the NGO Environmental Defense had just hired the boutique Wall treet firm Perella Weinberg Partners to advise it on a megadeal it had ecome involved in negotiating.
o Environmental Defense turned to the Web and created StopTXU com, a site that put out regular electronic newsletters on the TXU plans nd built a national constituency opposed to the deal.
ll of those efforts paid off when the big buyout firms Kohlberg ravis Roberts and Texas Pacific Group teamed up to offer $45 billion to uy TXU in early 2007.
It was going to be the largest leveraged buyout in istory, but there was a catch: "The buyers did not want to take over a ompany enmeshed in a war with environmentalists," said Krupp, "so hey came to us and said, 'We only want to go forward if you and NRDC Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental advocacy roup] will praise what we are trying to do here.'"
Eventually, the buyout group agreed to cut the number of ew TXU coal plants from eleven to three, to support a federal cap n carbon emissions, and to commit TXU to plowing $400 million nto energy-efficiency programs and doubling its purchase of wind ower.
Talking to itself in Texas, it didn't understand that it ould not manage its reputation simply by putting out press releases, ecause, thanks to the Internet, ordinary people could shape TXU's mage on a global basis through the Webfor almost no money.
The reputations of companies are going to be less determined by the uality of their PR people and more by their actual actions, and that em owers more of an honest debate on the merits," said Krupp.
The TXU example shows that ruth plus passion plus the Internet, said Krupp, "can create an irre istible tide for change."
eferring to these sudden outbreaks of citizen activism, the ashington lobbyist of a major global biochemical company put it to e this way: "We were operating under the old rules and then the old ules changed, but nobody put up a sign."
and sud enly there is a vast Internet campaign against bioengineering directed t your company, with people all over the world demanding: "Who re you to play with my food?"
In fact, this ind of activism is now so easy, so cheap, so readily available to even the mallest player that I would throw down this gauntlet to today's young eneration: If it's not happening, it's because you're not doing it.
ou want to raise money for African poverty relief, for Darfur efugees, or to save the elephants of Sri Lanka?
You can post the pictures on www.flickr.com or upload your wn documentary on YouTube or record your own podcast.
If your arguments or video or photos or voice are compelling, you'll ventually find an audience or it will find you.
If you have an entre reneurial bent, a passport, a little cash, and a lot of gumption, you can o off and start a small business just about anywhereand create better obs for people who are making only $1 a day rather than just protesting n their behalf at the next World Bank meeting.
Because the flattening F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G f the world extends free markets farther into different corners of the orld, now social entrepreneurs can leverage those markets to deliver obs, services, and profits for all kinds of people not just for the rich but lso for the poor and the aspiring middle class.
ere's a quick survey of some of the types of social entrepreneurship nd activism being enabled by the flattening of the world.
ssibly the best-known social entrepreneur-activist in the world to ay is Muhammad Yunus, a Bangladeshi who was awarded the 2006 obel Peace Prize.
In 1976, Yunus founded the Grameen Bank, which ranted small loans, without collateral, to the very poorest members of is society.
When I inter iewed Yunus in the fall of 2005, the thing that struck me most about im was his unbounded energy and obvious inner drive.
For a poor erson, Yunus explained to me, "microcredit is the key to unlocking ourself, and once you do that you see yourself differently.
That was why he had recently begun a program to ive small loans, as small as the equivalent of $10, to beggarsyes, beg ars!
Yunus said his bank has employees who approach beggars on the treets of Dhaka, Bangladesh, and asks them, " 'As you go from house to ouse, would you like to carry some sweets and toys, so you do both beg ing and sellingand whichever works out best, you go with that' And hat a change that makes!
e have more than eighty thousand beggars in that program and many  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lready quit begging, because they're already successful sellers.
t Grameen Bank, 97 percent of the borrowers are women, and the ayback rate is 98 percent.
He was teaching "elegant theories" of conomics at Chittagong University in 1976 but wanted to find a way to elp the poor and starving people he saw all around him on campus.
The loan worked out well, and that little spark rew into the Grameen Bank Project.
Yunus' innovation has broad appeal," BusinessWeek reported in its ecember 26, 2005, issue.
"In 1997 only about 7.6 million families had een served by microcredit worldwide, according to the 2005 State of the icrocredit Summit Campaign Report.
Almost 73% of them were living in dire poverty t the time of their first loan .
see social entrepreneurs like Yunus popping up everywhere, and not ll of them are focused on just the bottom rung of society.
onsider, for instance, Endeavor, founded in 1997 by Linda Rottenberg and Peter Kellner, who are what I would call "mentor capitalists."
Its asic model is to link up small and midsize businesses with seasoned en repreneurs so that the little guys and gals can get the advice and contacts hey need to grow their companies into bigger businesses that can em loy more people the best antipoverty program of all.
As The Wall Street Journal reported in a story about Endeavor April 15, 2003), "Latin America has long been viewed as a wasteland of usiness start-ups, with neither the financing nor the social mobility eeded to nourish entrepreneurial dreams .
Many development gencies in the region were focused on microcredits.
Endeavor's cho en beneficiariespeople with small to midsize businesses hoping to trike it richdidn't always elicit sympathy from donors.
Ms. Rottenberg emembers one foundation rejecting her on the grounds that she was just helping the middle class.'"
ut it is precisely these sorts of middle-class start-ups and small busi esses that create the most jobs and the greatest innovation in a society.
As ottenberg, Endeavor's cofounder and C E O , explained to me in an -mail, "The important work done by Grameen, Action, BancoSol and ther terrific micro-finance institutions has drawn attention to the need or small-scale loans to assist women and men at the bottom of the pyra id.
At he other extreme, access to world-class consulting and investment is imited to companies with $50 million to $100 million in revenues."
y contrast, she explained, "Endeavor enters the picture when en repreneurs have a proven business model that's yielded $500,000 to 20 million in revenueswith significant future growth potential.
We oc asionally take on pure start-ups, but we've found that the true inflection  H E W O R L D IS F L A T oint comes after the entrepreneur has taken the company to a certain oint but needs mentoring and strategic assistance to go to scale.
ndeavor's results are impressive: Rottenberg says that 96 percent of he entrepreneurs supported by the program are still operating and gen rating sustainable, well-paying jobsan average of 214 jobs per ndeavor company at ten times the minimum wage, and with signifi antly better benefits, too.
A decade ago when Endeavor was starting, there were neither panish nor Portuguese words for entrepreneur(ship).
here is huge untapped potential in this form of social entrepreneurship.
Too often, we have antipoverty debates but not proentrepreneurship debates.
\ 7 e t another form of social entrepreneurship is the i f-I-bu i 1 d-i t-th eyX will-benefit model.
My favorite example is Jeremy Hockenstein,  young man who first followed a time-honored path of studying at arvard and going to work for the McKinsey & Company consulting irm, but then, with a colleague from McKinsey, veered totally off ourse and started a not-for-profit firm that does outsourced data entry or American-based companies in one of the least hospitable busi ess environments in the worldpost-Pol Pot Cambodia.
F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G ere's the story: In February 2001, Hockenstein and some colleagues rom McKinsey decided to go to Phnom Penh, half on vacation and half n a scouting mission for some social entrepreneurship.
They were sur rised to find a city salted with Internet cafs and schools for learning En lishbut with no jobs, or at best limited jobs, for those who graduated.
That summer, after another trip funded y themselves, Hockenstein and his colleagues opened Digital Divide ata, with a plan to start a small operation in Phnom Penh that would o data entryhiring locals to type into computers printed materials hat companies in the United States wanted in digitized form, so that the ata could be stored on databases and retrieved and searched on com uters.
The material would be scanned in the United States and the files ransmitted over the Internet.
Hockenstein's partner from McKinsey, Jaeson osenfeld, went to New Delhi and knocked on the doors of Indian dataentry companies to see if he could find onejust onethat would take n his two Cambodian managers as trainees.
Nine of the Indian compa ies slammed their doors.
The last thing they wanted was even lower-cost ompetition emerging in Cambodia.
hey then hired their first twenty data-entry operators, many of hom were Cambodian war refugees, and bought twenty computers and n Internet line that cost them $100 a month.
The project was financed ith $25,000 of their own money and a $25,000 grant from the Global atalyst Foundation, started by Silicon Valley venture capitalists.
"So our irst project was having Cambodians typing news articles from the arvard Crimson from 1873 to 1899, which reported on Harvard-Yale rew races.
Later, actually, when we got to the years 1969 to 1971, when  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he turmoil in Cambodia was all happening, they were typing [Crimson tories] about their own story.
We would convert the old Crimsons, hich were on microfilm, to digital images in the United States through  company in Oklahoma that specialized in that sort of thing, and then e would just transfer the digital images to Cambodia by FTP [file trans er protocol].
The Cambodian typists did not have to know English, only how o type English characters; they worked in pairs, each typing the same ar icle, and then the computer program compared their work to make sure hat there were no errors.
"We have tried to pioneer socially responsi le outsourcing.
The U.S. companies working with us are not just saving oney that they can invest somewhere else.
our years after starting up, Digital Divide Data now has 400 em loyees in three offices: Phnom Penh; Battambang, the second-largest ity in Cambodia; and a new office in Vientiane, Laos.
"We recruited ur first two managers in Phnom Penh and sent them to India to get rained in data entry, and then, when we opened the Laos office, we re ruited two managers who were trained by our staff in the Phnom Penh ffice," Hockenstein said.
In 2005, when Google an ounced a controversial project to scan libraries full of books, DDD was oncerned that this would cut into its business.
Here's how: Another major search portal decided also o scan tens of thousands of books in the United States.
oand this is my favorite partsome of the first wave of Digital Divide ata's Cambodian workers left the company shortly after it started and pun off their own firm to design databases for NGOs that want to do sur eys!
Because while they were working for Digital Divide Data, aid Hockenstein, they kept getting survey work from NGOs that needed o be digitized.
So these Cambodian workers realized hat there was value earlier in the supply chain and that they could get aid more for itnot for typing but for designing standardized formats for GOs to collect survey data, which would make the surveys easier and heaper to digitize, collate, and manipulate.
So they started their own ompany to do just thatin Cambodia.
ockenstein argued that none of the jobs being done in Cambodia ame from the United States.
This sort of basic data-entry work got out ourced to India and the Caribbean a long time ago, and, if anywhere, hat is where the jobs were taken from.
But none of this would have been ossible to set up in Cambodia a decade ago.
ockenstein told me about his Cambodian partner, Sophary.
"Until 992 he was living in a refugee camp on the Cambodia-Thai border, hile I was living in Harvard Square as an undergrad.
After the UN peace treaty [in Cambodia], he walked home ten ays to his village, and now today he lives in Phnom Penh running igital Divide Data's office."
They now instant-message each other each ight to collaborate on the delivery of services to people and companies  H E W O R L D IS F L A T round the world.
y early 2007, 200 people had graduated from Digital Divide Data's rogram, and they were working in jobs averaging $153 a month.
ot surprisingly, as news of the program spread, Hockenstein and is partners began getting calls from people in Mongolia, Pakistan, ran, and Jordan who wanted to provide IT services to the world.
In mid2004, a client approached Digital Divide Data to digitize an EnglishArabic dictionary.
Around the same time, Hockenstein's office received n unsolicited e-mail from a company in Iran that was running a dataentry firm there.
"They found us through a Google search," said Hocken tein.
e did the whole deal over Yahoo!
instant messenger and e-mail.
We ired him the money through Cambodia .
Reflecting on his and his partner's experience in start ng Digital Divide Data, he added: "Two people and a computer were ble to create better lives for three hundred people .
o one assigned Hockenstein to go to Cambodia.
"And twenty-four hours later we were in the office of the person ho had brought the Internet to Cambodia and was searching for a way o create jobs."
True sustainability depends on market solutions," Hockenstein eplied.
Most in Cambodia had to go back to heir family farms or sex trafficking."
We have rescued twenty women in Cambodia ho now work at our place and have not had to go back to their previous ives.
f course, the vast majority of people in Cambodia remain poor and isadvantaged.
What is new is the emergence of home rown Cambodian and Laotian engines to make Cambodia and Laos ess poor.
I hap ened to come across the work of Julie Lindsay, from the International chool Dhaka, in Bangladesh, and Vicki Davis, from Westwood Schools  H E W O R L D IS F L A T n Camilla, Georgia, while surfing the Web.
dded Davis: "When Julie contacted me, I knew that our projectbased learning environment would mesh well with Julie's, and we im ediately created a wiki and began planning" an educational joint enture.
he Flat Classroom Project (http://flatclassroomproject.wikispaces com) took six weeks to plan and lasted for two weeks.
Students from the lass in Bangladesh and the class in Georgia were partnered and given he task to create a wiki page (a common Web page whose "members" an upload and edit content) based on one of the ten flatteners.
To do his effectively, the students communicated regularly over the Internet, hared resources (photographs, music, and the like), and planned their roject as if they were literally face-to-face in one classroom.
Some students, for example, "out ourced" portions of their video presentation to their international part er, their teachers explained to me.
he students moved seamlessly among many types of software, hard are, and Web applications to create an effective Web presentation on heir topic, the teachers said in a joint e-mail they sent me.
Students and teachers also sed VoIP (Skype), IM chat, MySpace (to connect), Evoca (to share au io), YouTube, Google Video, Dropload (to transfer files), and many ther resources to collaborate."
indsay and Davis agreed that social networking has great potential or learning and inspiring global collaboration.
They want to understand if the stereotypes portrayed y much of the mass media are true and they want to connect and decide or themselvesthus the explosive growth of sites like MySpace and ouTube.
This ability to connect has largely been ignored and blocked y many in the educational community who would rather maintain the ntrenched style of a classroom that has been around for over a hundred ears.
But there are some educators creating safe, meaningful, engaging flat' online projects and collaboratives who are experiencing incredible esults in their classrooms and sharing it with one another."
me other social entrepreneurs are now using the flat-world platform o try to improve government in the United States, because they un erstand that this new platform gives a whole new power to grassroots ac-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ivists in a democracyas opposed to party machines or big media.
I met Rasiej uring his campaign, when he was trying to get attention for his proposal hat New York City provide universal Wi-Fi infrastructure, so anyone nywhere could get access to high-speed Internet and cell phone cover ge.
asiej proposed the creation of a Web site where any citizen using his r her cell phone could take a picture of a pothole, any dangerous bro en railing, or even a suspected crime and immediately e-mail it to City all or post it on the official Web site, so every citizen, in effect, becomes  potential ombudsman.
Two years later, New York City started imple enting just such a program.
"Dean did not realize that the money that was lowing into his campaign, via the Internet, was actually the by-product F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G f the vibrant community of Democratic and angry anti-Bush and anti ar voters who were talking to each other and propelling his candi acy," said Rasiej.
The next technological political model will revolve round the power of community and individual uploading.
They write: "A new force, rooted in new ools and practices built on and around the Internet, is rising alongside he old system of capital-intensive broadcast politics... Networked oices are reviving the civic conversation.
ust look at how Virginia's Senator George Allen was caught on video sing the term "macaca" to dismiss a young critican insult that was up oaded to the Internet, where it fatally wounded his reelection campaign.
uture elections, note Rasiej and Sifry, are sure to be even further affected y the scope and reach of the Internet, "with all kinds of voter-generated ontent, citizen activism, social networks, and the power of the technol gy to force transparency in the electoral process and in government."
lls simply aren't what they used to be even for kings and ueensand this change is opening new opportunities for politi al activism where it was previously unimaginable.
A vivid example of this as described by William Wallis in the Financial Times (November 24, 006).
Writing from Manama, Bahrain, Wallis reported that "[s]ince ahrain's government blocked the Google Earth Web site earlier this year or its intrusion into private homes and royal palaces, Googling their is and kingdom has become a national pastime for many Bahrainis."
ahrain is a tiny island state off the east coast of Saudi Arabia.
About 0 per cent of Bahrain's population are Shiite Muslims, but the ruling alKhalifa family are Sunnis.
The Bahraini Shiites have long insisted on a reater share of wealth and power.
The site allows Internet users to view satellite images of the world in arying degrees of detail.
When Google updated its images of Bahrain to igher definition, cyber-activists seized on the view it gave of estates and rivate islands belonging to the ruling al-Khalifa family to highlight the nequity of land distribution in the tiny Gulf kingdom," Wallis explained.
senior government official told Wallis that Google Earth "had allowed he public to pry into private homes and ogle people's motor yachts and F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G wimming pools.
It gave instant ublicity to Google Earth and contributed to growing sophistication mong Bahrainis in circumventing web censorship.
allis explained: "Mahmood al-Yousif, a businessman whose politi al chat and blog site Mahmood's Den is among Bahrain's most popular, ays that in the tense run-up to the polls, few Bahrainis have not surfed ver the contours of their kingdom, comparing vast royal palaces, marinas nd golf courses with crowded Shia villages nearby, where unemploy ent is rife and services meagre.
For those with insufficient bandwidth o access Google Earth, a PDF file with dozens of downloaded images f royal estates has been circulated anonymously by e-mail.
All they saw were the surround ng walls,' said Mr Yousif, who is seen in Bahrain as the grandfather of its logging community.
He and other activists believe creative use of the Internetconnec ivity in Bahrain is among the highest in the Arab worldis forcing the ountry to confront awkward realities and will speed the march towards  more egalitarian society.
s they have been for generations, all of these Bahraini royal palaces  H E W O R L D IS F L A T re surrounded by high walls, keeping people from looking inside.
And hen along came Google Earth.
ile covering the Arab-Israeli conflict, I learned that the way ou get big change is by getting the big players to do the right hing for the wrong reasons.
This approach eally underpins another kind of social entrepreneurship being made ossible by the flat world activists partnering with the world's largest ultinational corporations to get them to change their business prac ices, with far-reaching effects.
n the flat world, the balance of power between global companies nd the individual communities in which they operate is tilting more nd more in favor of the companies, many of them American-based.
hese companies command as much if not more power than many gov rnments, not only to create value but also to transmit values.
The desire f corporations to avoid being the target of global protest in a flat world as made them much more open to working with social and environ ental activists, who are collaborating with progressive companies in ways hat can make the companies more profitable and the flat earth more ivable.
If you think bout the forces that are gobbling up biodiversity around the planet, no orce is more powerful than farming.
Conservation International, one of the iggest environmental NGOs in the world, has as its main mission pre erving biodiversity.
"We and McDonald's ooked at a set of environmental issues and said, 'Here are the things the ood suppliers could do to reduce the environmental impact at little or o cost,'" explained Glenn Prickett, senior vice president of Conser ation International.
cDonald's then met with its key suppliers and worked out, with hem and with CI, a set of guidelines for what McDonald's calls "socially esponsible food supply."
"For conservationists, the challenge is how do ou get your arms around hundreds of millions of decisions and decision akers involved in agriculture and fisheries, who are not coordinated in ny way except by the market," said Prickett.
"So what we look for are artners who can put their purchasing power behind a set of environ entally friendly practices in a way that is good for them, works for the roducers, and is good for biodiversity.
There is no global government uthority to protect biodiversity.
onservation International is already seeing improvements in con ervation of water, energy, and waste, as well as steps to encourage better anagement of fisheries, among McDonald's suppliers.
Conservation International as struck similar supply-chain collaborations with Starbucks, setting ules for its supply chain of coffee farmers, and Office Depot, with its upply chain of paper-product providers.
Conservation International is work ng with Wal-Mart's executives to think about their environmental foot rint and create a strategy to turn that from a negative to a positivefrom ow they use energy to the packaging of the products they sell to how hose products are produced around the world.
What is exciting about working with Wal-Mart is that it is the world's argest retailer," said Prickett, "and when you start to impact its supply hain in terms of the standards it expects its suppliers to adopt, you are alking about more than sixty thousand suppliers across every merchan ise supply chain and around the world.
We have already seen that begin to empower indi iduals in big companies who have had great green ideas for their supply hains but have never had the executive-level mandate to act on them.
ow they do either because they are a Wal-Mart supplier and have to o green, or because they have experienced the Wal-Mart effect and heir bosses are saying, 'Hey, there is something to this.'
It is the democ atization of sustainability.
In October 2004, F IT'S N O T H A P P E N I N G hese three giants joined forces, in a collaborative effort with key mem ers of their computer and printer supply chains, to promote a unified ode of socially responsible manufacturing practices across the world.
he new Electronics Industry Code of Conduct includes bans on bribes, hild labor, embezzlement and extortion, and violations of intellectual roperty; rules governing usage of wastewater, hazardous materials, ollutants; and regulations on the reporting of occupational injuries.
everal major electronics manufacturers who serve the IBM, Dell, and P supply chains collaborated on writing the code, including Celestica, lextronics, Jabil, Sanmina-SCI, and Solectron.
Nevertheless, his use of supply chains to create valuesnot just value could be a ave of the future.
Customers care," said Dunn, "and European customers lead the way in aring.
You are global companies, you can set ex ectations that will influence environmental practices and human rights ractices in emerging markets.'"
hose voices are right, and what is more, they can use the Internet to rive the point home to companies that don't get it.
But now the imbalance of power is so huge it is not practical to say hat Wal-Mart or HP can do whatever they want as long as a state gov rnment or country does not stop them.
have no doubt that plenty of abuse remains in electronics factories n the developing worldparticularly in China even in those produc ng for the likes of HP, Dell, and IBM.
But I also have no doubt that pro rams like the Electronics Industry Code of Conduct create a baseline hat give labor activists a much more powerful club to wield in pressing or improved working conditions.
And the key o enforcement is for social entrepreneurs to educate consumers to the act that they have power, that their buying decisions and buying power re political tools and they need to use them.
t is it a sell-out for social entrepreneurs to try to change the world hrough markets rather than marches?
Watson grew up n the environmental movement, was one of the most respected environ entalists working on China, but eventually decided to go to business chool and start a company.
When I asked him why, he sent me the fol owing e-mail, titled "What I Learned in Business School."
For over twenty years that organization was the non rofit Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), one of the orld's most effective environmental advocacy groups.
At NRDC  had the good fortune to have worked on four continents helping F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G overnments and businesses create policies, programs and proj cts that help the environment.
As a founding member and vol nteer for the U.S. Green Building Council, I founded the EED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) green uilding rating system, which due to the dedication of hun reds of volunteers like myself and tireless efforts of the USGBC taffhas become the premier green building certification sys em in the world.
For many years when people came to e at NRDC for advice about how to get involved and make a dif erence with the environment, invariably they would ask me o which law program or environmental science program they hould apply.
Economics, fi ance and accounting are human laws and can be changed nlike, say, gravity, which is a natural lawone that applies to all pecies, not just one.
So Ifinallytook my own advice and ent to Columbia Business School.
the fall of 2006 I took a reporting/book-promotion trip to Germany nd France.
A oung man of African descent, the driver was carrying a sign with my ame on it, and as I approached him I noticed that he was talking to imself, in French, very animatedly.
When I related all this to y friend Alain Frachon, a senior editor at Le Monde, he quipped, "I uess the era of foreign correspondents quoting taxi drivers is over!"
For all I know, the driver was talking to his parents omewhere in Africa.
hen I shared this story with Linda Stone, the technologist who labeled he disease of the Internet age "continuous partial attention"two eople doing six things, devoting only partial attention to each oneshe emarked to me, "We're so accessible, we're inaccessible.
hese encounters illustrate a few of the many social downsides of all  H A T H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
By social downsides, I do ot mean things like Osama bin Laden using a cell phone or terrorist etworks setting up Web sites.
I mean the social downsides for you and e, our children and neighbors, strangers and friends, and the effects all his new connectivity is having on our interactions and public life.
What hap ens when the Internet becomes so ubiquitous and search engines so re ined that we can all suddenly hear everything whispered about us?
eetings, too, are not what they used to be, not when half the people in he room are checking their PalmPilots and BlackBerrys under the table, hile they occasionally nod their head at you or glance your way.
No BlackBerrys allowed."
All we o now is interrupt each other (and ourselves) with these instant mes ages, e-mail, or cell phone calls.
Otherwise, how will I ever be able to get still enough to hear the ext character talking to me when cell phones are ringing and e-mail is alling and the Web, that ever-present temptress, is wooing me?"
One day in the fall of 2006,1 was trying to track down my friend aron Ezrahi in Jerusalem to ask him a question.
Moore's Law applies to microchips, but not to the human brain.
Some days I look at all the e-mail waiting in my computer nd I just want to delete it allwithout reading a word.
In June 2006, after touring the Peruvian rain fo est, I was left with two especially strong impressions.
Yes, I had to go to the Tambopata Research Center, deep n the Peruvian rain forest, to find it, but I can report there is still a place ith no Internet or cell phone service.
Of course, there are many such laces, but the fact that I had seen people using their cell phones from top the sacred Inca ruin of Machu Picchu two days earlier reminded e that there are fewer and fewer each day, even in the Andes.
The ad might read: "We guarantee that every room comes WITH UT Internet service."
When so many eople can upload and globalize their voice, their video, their blog, their  H A T H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
But there are plenty of thers who either could really use an editor or should be keeping their houghts to themselvesor reading a book or taking a class, rather than logging and podcasting in their spare time.
hen Time magazine celebrated "You" (as in YouTube) as its Person f the Year for 2006, the magazine's cover package included a skeptical iece by NBC Nightly News anchor Brian Williams, a piece that raised his issue.
Will wrote: "Richard Stengel, Time's manag ng editor, says, 'Thomas Paine was in effect the first blogger' and 'Ben ranklin was essentially loading his persona into the MySpace of the 8th century, "Poor Richard's Almanack.'"
No one ever wrote a great book with his thumbs, which is how any young people type SMSshort message servicetext messages n their cell phones.
eff Stanton, an associate professor in the school of informa ion sciences at Syracuse University, said sometimes he is taken back at how informal students have become in the way they ommunicate.
ere is one other social downside I worry about in this Age of nterruption: What happens when we can all not only rant or whis er anything we want in our MySpace blog or podcast, but also hear verything ranted or whispered about us?
Millions of people today are blogging, podcasting, nd creating video content for YouTube or their own MySpace or acebook or Yahoo!
Groups or Friendster or Flickr or Second Life sites, r just writing for online newspapers or magazines.
Beyond the sheer mateur-hour quality of a lot of this content, it is bringing some trou ling social and legal issues our way much faster than weor our legal ystemsare ready to handle.
f you are any kind of public figure todayin politics, sports, enter ainment, education, media, business, or governmentchances are that omeone out there somewhere is blogging about you right now.
And if ou want to find out what people are saying, all you have to do is type our name into Google or Technorati.com and hit Search.
As I write hese words, in April 2007, Google's search engine brings up 60,100,000 eferences to the phrase "The World Is Flat."
I confess, there was a time hen I would use Google to see what was being written about this book.
Because when we are all publishers with ur own blogs, and when we are all broadcasters through YouTube, and  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hen we are all paparazzi thanks to our cell phone cameras, we are all ublic figures.
hat happens when one of your neighbors makes a nasty comment r uploads some embarrassing pictures of you into his or her MySpace o that now the whole world can see them, along with you?
What hap ens if your neighbor hears shouting and crashing dishes from your ouse one evening and writes in her MySpace blog, "The Johnsons had  wild fight last night.
How do you get the misperception corrected after it has been sent all over the neighborhood and ll over the world?
onsider this October 11, 2006, article from the technology news site rstechnica.com: The headline read, "Principal Sues Students, Parents ver MySpace Page."
The article, by Nate Anderson, began: "MySpace ill eventually be used to save the life of a cute puppy trapped in a well, nd the company will bask in the glow of some unusual good press.
he two students, Anderson explained, set up a MySpace page in the rincipal's name that suggested she was a lesbian, which she was not.
urthermore, the page featured comments from other MySpace users ho knew the assistant principal.
The situation rattled the school administration enough that [the assistant rincipalis picture was removed from the school Web site and a brief ideo about the dangers of MySpace was posted instead.
In the old days, you retty much had to be a movie star like Tom Cruise or a well-known olitician to worry about what strangers might say about you in print, and sually the worst that these celebrities had to worry about was a false or ex ggerated story in a supermarket tabloid like the National Enquirer.
After all, what was the National Enquirer?
And as outrageous as the National Enquirer might be, it as always accountable for what it wroteand could be held account ble in court, because it was published by a company whose address ould be found inside.
You could not easily buy a copy out ide of the United States.
oreover, the buyers of the National Enquirer had no easy way to onnect with one another, or, for that matter, with the tabloid's editors.
Skinheads or violent Islamic radicals had to ex end a lot of energy to find each other in significant numbers twenty ears ago.
And just as urricane Katrina gained in virulence when it passed over the warm wa ers of the Gulf of Mexico before striking New Orleans, so these com unities gain in virulence from the warmth they draw by connecting ith one another.
People in emocracies do not like to think about this, but we have put this system ut into the world and made it available to every good-hearted social en repreneur and every nut, no matter how small.
I don't want to read about this in your MySpace!"?
"Internet addiction" afflicts adults and teenagers alike.
As individuals are able to create more  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f their own content in digital form, and as search engines and comput rs get better and better at sifting and storing all that digital content and elivering it back to us, the Internet will become a kind of permanent ecord, an always open book.
Every e-mail you send, every entry you ake in Facebook, in MySpace, or on YouTube is a digital footprint that ill never be washed away by the sea.
In time, Google, SN Search, and Yahoo!
ov Seidman, the business ethicist, uses the simple example of the ersonal rsum, which college grads have used for years to apply for heir first job and for other jobs after that.
For someone else to check every actoid in your rsum was very difficult and expensive in a world with allsbut not in a flat world, not in the age of Google.
They can go to our MySpace page and see how you write and get to know your friends, earch the Web and see what youVe done, right and wrong, or evaluate HAT H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
They can recon truct these artifacts of your life, even after you have tried to delete them."
he Washington Post reported (March 7, 2006) that many employers, ncluding law firms, were now doing Google searches as part of due dili ence checks on prospective employees.
"According to a December sur ey by the Ponemon Institute, a privacy research organization, roughly alf of U.S. hiring officials use the Internet in vetting job applications," he Posr reported.
What could tip the balance is the appearance that a candidate is a ightning rod for controversy, said Mark Rasch, a Washington lawyer and onsultant who specializes in Internet issues."
Tor many people the Internet has become a scarlet etter, an albatross,' said Michael Fertik, ReputationDefender's chief ex cutive."
o be sure, there are some upsides to all these social downsides.
The reason this all came up at our lunch was that Jill men ioned that at health clubs around the city, where she played tennis, she  H E W O R L D IS F L A T oticed two signs now popping up regularly, one right after the other.
No guns or cell phones allowed?
Guns I understand, I said, ut why cell phones?
It was because some people were bringing cell phones with ameras into locker rooms, covertly taking pictures of naked men and omen and then e-mailing them around the world.
Whatever the innovation, people will find a way to use it and abuse it.
hile interviewing Promod Haque at Norwest Venture Partners in alo Alto, I was helped by the firm's public relations director, Katie elding, who later sent me this e-mail: "I was chatting with my husband bout your meeting with Promod the other day .
Intrigued, I alled her husband, Brian, and he picked up the story: "At the end of the eriod, when all of the tests were being passed up to the front of the class oom, this student very quickly and slyly pulled out his cell phone and omehow snapped a picture of some test questions, and instantly e-mailed t to his friend who was taking the same test the next period.
His friend lso had a cell phone with a digital camera and e-mail capabilities, and as apparently able to view the questions before the next period.
Cameras were not al- HE UNFLAT WORLD owed, but cell phones were.
So then the concert starts and everyone sud enly starts holding up their cell phones and taking pictures of Jimmy uffett.
We were sitting in the second row nd the guy next to us held up his cell phone, and I said, 'Hey, would you ind e-mailing me some of those?
e said 'Sure,' and we gave him a card with our e-mail [address].
We idn't really expect to see any, but the next day he e-mailed us a bunch."
y trip to Beijing described earlier fell right after the fifteenth anni ersary of the Tiananmen Square massacre, which happened on June 4, 989, that is, 6/4/89.
My colleagues at the Times bureau informed me hat on that day the Chinese government censors were blocking SMS essages on cell phones that contained any reference to Tiananmen quare or even the numbers 6 and 4.
ark Steyn, writing in the National Review (October 25, 2004), re ated a story from the London Arabic newspaper Al-Quds al-Arabi about  panic that broke out in Khartoum, Sudan, after a crazy rumor swept the ity, claiming that if an infidel shook a man's hand, that man could lose is manhood.
"What struck me about the story," wrote Steyn, "was a de ail: The hysteria was spread by cell phones and text messaging.
his is not a chapter about cell phones, so why do I raise these stories?
nd after a transition, everyone will get richer and smarter and it will all e fine.
If we create an Internet here people can open an online store and have global suppliers, global ustomers, and global competitors, they will open that online store or ank or bookshop.
If we create work flow platforms that allow companies o disaggregate any job and source it to the knowledge center anywhere n the world that can perform that task most efficiently at the lowest cost, ompanies will do that sort of outsourcing.
If we create cell phones with ameras in them, people will use them for all sorts of tasks, from cheat ng on tests to calling Grandma in her nursing home on her ninetieth irthday from the top of a mountain in New Zealand.
The history of eco omic development teaches this over and over: If you can do it, you must o it, otherwise your competitors willand as this book has tried to emonstrate, there is a whole new universe of things that companies, ountries, and individuals can and must do to thrive in a flat world.
oo ICK  nce heard Jerry Yang, the cofounder of Yahoo!, quote a senior hinese government official as saying, "Where people have hope, ou have a middle class."
The exis ence of large, stable middle classes around the world is crucial to geo olitical stability, but middle class is a state of mind, not a state of ncome.
That's why a majority of Americans always describe themselves s "middle class," even though by income statistics some of them wouldn't e considered as such.
"Middle class" is another way of describing eople who believe that they have a pathway out of poverty or lowerincome status toward a higher standard of living and a better future for heir kids.
You can be in the middle class in your head whether you make 2 a day or $200, if you believe in social mobilitythat your kids have a hance to live better than you doand that hard work and playing by the ules of your society will get you where you want to go.
The good news in India and China nd the countries of the former Soviet Empire today is that, with all their laws and internal contradictions, these countries are now home to hun reds of millions of people who are hopeful enough to be middle class.
he bad news in Africa today, as well as rural India, China, Latin America, nd plenty of dark corners of the developed world, is that there are hun reds of millions of people who have no hope and therefore no chance f making it into the middle class.
he first group, those who are too sick, are those whose lives are talked every day by HIV-AIDS, malaria, TB, and polio, and who do not ven enjoy steady electricity or potable water.
While in Bangalore I isited an experimental school, Shanti Bhavan, or "Haven of Peace."
"They come from homes below the poverty line, and from the owest caste, the untouchables, who are supposed to be fulfilling their estiny and left where they are.
We have o start by socializing them.
This 'India Shining thing [the slogan of the ruling Bharatiya Janata arty, BJP, in the 2004 election] irritates people like us," she added.
"You ave to come to the rural villages and see whether India is shining, and ou look into a child's face and see whether India is shining.
India is shin ng okay for the glossy magazines, but if you just go outside Bangalore ou will see that everything about India shining is refuted .
here are thousands of such villages in rural India, China, Africa, and atin America.
And that is why it is no wonder that children in the devel ping worldthe unflat worldare ten times more likely to die of vaccinepreventable diseases than are children in the developed flat world.
In the orst-affected regions of rural southern Africa, a full one-third of pregnant omen are reportedly HIV-positive.
The AIDS epidemic alone is enough o put a whole society into a tailspin: Many teachers in these African ountries are now afflicted with AIDS, so they cannot teach, and young hildren, especially girls, have to drop out either because they must tend o sick and dying parents or because they have been orphaned by AIDS nd cannot afford the school fees.
And without education, young people annot learn how to protect themselves from HIY-AIDS or other diseases, et alone acquire the life-advancing skills that enable women to gain reater control over their own bodies and sexual partners.
The prospect of  full-blown AIDS epidemic in India and China, of the sort that has al eady debilitated southern Africa, remains very real, largely because only ne-fifth of the people at risk for HIV worldwide have access to prevention  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ervices.
You annot drive economic growth in a place where 50 percent of the people re infected with malaria or half of the kids are malnourished or a third of he mothers are dying of AIDS.
here is no question that China and India are better off for having at east part of their population in the flat world.
When societies begin to rosper, you get a virtuous cycle going: They begin to produce enough ood for people to leave the land, the excess labor gets trained and edu ated, it begins working in services and industry; that leads to innovation nd better education and universities, freer markets, economic growth nd development, better infrastructure, fewer diseases, and slower popu ation growth.
It is that dynamic that is going on in parts of urban India nd urban China today, enabling people to compete on a level playing ield and attracting investment dollars by the billions.
They live in illages or rural areas that only criminals would want to invest in, regions here violence, civil war, and disease compete with one another to see hich can ravage the civilian population most.
One of the few people ith enough dollars to make a difference who has stepped up to this hallenge is Microsoft chairman Bill Gates, whose $27 billion Bill and elinda Gates Foundation has focused on this huge, disease-ravaged, pportunity-deprived population.
But I have been mpressed by Gates's personal commitment of money and energy to ad ress the unflat world.
But the fact is, there is a trap that hese three billion are caught in, and they may never get into the virtu us cycle of more education, more health, more capitalism, more rule of aw, more wealth .
ake malaria, a disease caused by a parasite carried by mosquitoes.
While virtually o one dies of malaria today in the flat world, more than one million eople die from this disease each year in the unflat world, about seven undred thousand of them children, most of them in Africa.
Deaths rom malaria have actually doubled in the last twenty years because the alaria parasite carried by mosquitoes has become resistant to many anti alarial drugs, and commercial drug companies have not invested uch in new antimalarial vaccines because they believe there is no prof table market for them.
If this crisis were happening in a flat country, oted Gates, the system would work: Government would do what it eeded to do to contain the disease, pharmaceutical companies would o what they needed to do to get the drugs to market, schools would ed cate young people about preventive measures, and the problem would e licked.
When the Gates Foun ation issued a $50 million grant to combat malaria, he added, "people aid we just doubled the amount of money [worldwide] going to fight alaria .
The kid who is connected to the Internet oday, if he has the curiosity [he] is as [empowered] as me.
et's stop here for a moment and imagine how beneficial it would be  H E W O R L D IS F L A T or the world, and for America, if rural China, India, and Africa were to row into little Americas or European Unions in economic and oppor unity terms.
n 2003, the Gates Foundation launched a project called Grand hallenges in Global Health.
So the Gates Foundation placed ads on he Web and in more conventional channels across both the developed nd the developing worlds, asking scientists to respond to one big ques ion: What are the biggest problems that, if science attended to them and olved them, could most dramatically change the fate of the several bil ion people trapped in the vicious cycle of infant mortality, low life ex ectancy, and disease?
In the fall of 2003, it announced these ourteen Grand Challenges worldwide.
They include the following: ow to create effective single-dose vaccines that can be used soon after irth, how to prepare vaccines that do not require refrigeration, how to evelop needle-free delivery systems for vaccines, how to better under tand which immunological responses provide protective immunity, how o better control insects that transmit agents of disease, how to develop a enetic or chemical strategy to incapacitate a disease-transmitting insect opulation, how to create a full range of optimal bioavailable nutrients in HE UNFLAT WORLD  single staple plant species, and how to create immunological methods hat can cure chronic infections.
We're trying to accomplish two things with this program," explained ick Klausner, a former head of the National Cancer Institute who directed he global health programs for the Gates Foundation before stepping down n the fall of 2005.
hat was interesting, said Klausner, was how quickly the different rant winners assembled themselves into collaborative communities ecause it really does take a village to solve such complex problems, and he scientists quickly realized that they were not competing with one an ther.
In the instance of malaria, for example, it sn't just the drugs that are missing.
As anyone who has visited Africa or ural India knows, the health-care systems in these areas are often broken  H E W O R L D IS F L A T r functioning at a very low level.
In a flat world, where innovation can come from anywhere, we are etting a huge pool of potential contributors and collaborators slip under he waves.
There is no question that poverty causes ill health, but ill ealth also traps people in poverty, which in turn weakens them and eeps them from grasping the first rung of the ladder to middle-class ope.
The world has long witnessed pandemics that have wiped ut millions of people in a very short period of time.
And the world has ecently witnessed the rise of Wal-Mart and its remarkable high-speed upply chain, which is able to transmit products from one corner of the orld to another in a very short period of time.
What the world has never itnessed is an old-style pandemic in a Wal-Mart world.
flu pandemic in a Wal-Mart world would be a hugely unflattening ightmare from two directions at once: From one side, the flat world HE UNFLAT WORLD ould enable any pandemic to spread much faster and much wider, robably killing many more people.
And, from the other side, it would ake the economic devastation from such a pandemic so much greater nd more sudden, because our natural response to pandemics is to put p walls and to sever connectivity and face-to-face contactsince the ovement and interaction of both people and goods is precisely what preads something like the influenza virus.
But hen the world is flatteningwhen some 80 percent of the raw materi ls that go into pharmaceutical drugs sold in America come from over eas suppliers, and when the rubber that keeps surgical masks tight n your face comes through a just-in-time supply chain that starts in ndonesia or Africa, stretches through Europe, and then skips over to mericaour ability to cope with any pandemic would be sharply re uced.
ichael T. Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease esearch and Policy and professor at the University of Minnesota's chool of Public Health, notes that the spread of the SARS (Severe Acute espiratory Syndrome) virus in 2003 demonstrated just how quickly such n infectious disease can move in a flattening world, given the speed and ensity of international air travel.
Once SARS emerged in rural China, e noted, it spread to five countries within twenty-four hours, and to hirty countries on six continents within several months causing bil ions of dollars in economic loss, because, for instance, longshoremen n the West Coast of the United States did not want to off-load cargo hips that had come from infected regions.
As exciting and as visible as the flat ndian high-tech sector is, have no illusions: It accounts for 0.2 percent f employment in India.
Add those Indians involved in manufacturing or export, and you get a total of 2 percent of employment in India.
he half flat are all those other hundreds of millions of people, partic larly in rural India, rural China, and rural Eastern Europe, who are close nough to see, touch, and occasionally benefit from the flat world but ho are not really living inside it themselves.
We saw how big and how an ry this group can be in the spring of 2004 Indian national elections, in hich the ruling BJP was surprisingly tossed out of officedespite having verseen a surge in India's growth ratelargely because of the discontent f rural Indian voters with the slow pace of globalization outside the gi- HE UNFLAT WORLD nt cities.
hese rural voterspeasants and farmers, who form the bulk of India s opulationjust had to spend a day in any nearby big city to see the ben fits of the flat world: the cars, the houses, the educational opportunities.
Every time a villager watches the community T V and sees an ad for soap r shampoo, what they notice are not the soap and shampoo but the ifestyle of the people using themthe kind of motorbikes they ride, their ress, and their homes," explained Indian-born Nayan Chanda, editor of aleGlobal Online.
t the same time, these rural Indians understood, at gut level, exactly hy it was not happening for them: because local governments have be ome so eaten away by corruption and mismanagement that they cannot eliver to the poor the schools and infrastructure they need to get a fair hare of the pie.
As some of these millions of Indians on the outside of the ated communities looking in lose hope, "they become more religious, ore tied to their caste/subcaste, more radical in their thinking, more illing to snatch than create, [and] view dirty politics as being the only ay to get mobility, since economic mobility is stalled," said Vivek Paul f Wipro.
India can have the smartest high-tech vanguard in the world, ut if it does not find a way to bring along more of those who are unable, isabled, undereducated, and underserved, it will be like a rocket that akes off but quickly falls back to earth for lack of sustained thrust.
he Congress Party got the message, which was why as soon as it took ffice it chose as its prime minister not some antiglobalizer but Manmohan ingh, the former Indian finance minister, who in 1991firstopened the ndian economy to globalization, placing an emphasis on exports and rade and reform wholesale.
And Singh, in turn, pledged himself to vasdy ncrease government investments in rural infrastructure and to bring ore reform retail to rural government.
I think, first and fore ost, they can redefine the meaning of global populism.
It has to be by refocusing the energies of the global populist ovement on how to improve local government, infrastructure, and ed cation in places like rural India and China, so the populations there an acquire the tools to collaborate and participate in the flat world.
The lobal populist movement, better known as the antiglobalization move ent, has a great deal of energy, but up to now it has been too divided nd confused to effectively help the poor in any meaningful or sustained anner.
What they resent is not having any pathway to get rich nd to join the flat world and cross that line into the middle class that erry Yang spoke about.
The ntiglobalization movement emerged at the World Trade Organization onference in Seattle in 1999 and then spread around the world in sub equent years, usually gathering to attack meetings of the World Bank, the MF, and the G-8 industrialized nations.
One was upper-middle-class American liberal uilt at the incredible wealth and power that America had amassed in the ake of the fall of the Berlin Wall and the dot-com boom.
The second force driving it was a rear-guard push by he Old Leftsocialists, anarchists, and Trotskyitesin alliance with pro ectionist trade unions.
Their strategy was to piggyback on rising concerns bout globalization to bring back some form of socialism, even though hese ideas had been rejected as bankrupt by the very people in the former oviet Empire and China who had lived under them longest.
(Now you now why there was no antiglobalization movement to speak of in Russia, HE UNFLAT WORLD hina, or Eastern Europe.)
These Old Left forces wanted to spark a de ate about whether we globalize.
It was made up of many eople who gave passive support to the antiglobalization movement from any countries, because they saw in it some kind of protest against the peed at which the old world was disappearing and becoming flat.
he fourth force driving the movement, which was particularly strong n Europe and in the Islamic world, was anti-Americanism.
The disparity etween American economic and political power and everybody else's had rown so wide after the fall of the Soviet Empire that America began to r was perceived totouch people's lives around the planet, directiy or in irectly, more than their own governments did.
As that happened, eople in the world began to say, "Now we really want a vote in how merica wields its power" and in many ways the whole Iraq war debate as a surrogate debate about that.
inally, the fifth force in this movement was a coalition of very seri us, well-meaning, and constructive groups from environmentalists to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T rade activists to NGOs concerned with governancewho became part f the populist antiglobalization movement in the 1990s in the hopes hat they could catalyze a global discussion about how we globalize.
The more serious how-we-globalize groups did not want to be in he same trench with anarchists out to provoke a public clash with police, nd after 9/11, many American labor groups did not want to be associated ith a movement that appeared to be taken over by anti-American ele ents.
This became even more pronounced when in late September 001, just weeks after 9/11, antiglobalization leaders attempted a rerun of enoa in the streets of Washington, to protest the IMF and World Bank eetings there.
After 9/11, though, the IMF and World Bank canceled heir meetings, and many American protesters shied away.
Those who did urn up in the streets of Washington turned the event into a march against he imminent American invasion of Afghanistan to remove Osama bin aden and al-Qaeda.
At the same time, with the triple convergence mak ng the Chinese, Indians, and Eastern Europeans some of the biggest eneficiaries of globalization, it was no longer possible to claim that this henomenon was devastating the world's poor.
Just the opposite: Millions f Chinese and Indians were entering the world's middle class thanks to he flattening of the world and globalization.
As Hebrew University political heorist Yaron Ezrahi so aptly noted, "The important task of enlisting the eople's power to influence globalism making it more compassionate, air, and compatible with human dignityis way too important to be asted on crass anti-Americanism or left in the hands of only antiAmericans."
The best place such a movement ould start is rural India.
Both the Congress [Party] and its left allies would be risking India's uture if they draw the wrong conclusion from this [2004] election," ratap Bhanu Mehta, who heads the Center for Policy Research in elhi, wrote in The Hindu newspaper.
his is why the most important forces fighting poverty in India today, n my view, are those NGOs fighting for better local governance, using he Internet and other modern tools of the flat world to put a spotiight on orruption, mismanagement, and tax avoidance.
Modern populism, to be effective and meaningful, should be about eform retail making globalization workable, sustainable, and fair for ore people by improving their local governance, so that the money ear arked for the poor actually gets to them and so that their natural entrepreneurship can get unlocked.
The average Indian villagers cannot e like the Indian high-tech companies and just circumvent the govern ent by supplying their own electricity, their own water resources, their wn security, their own bus system, and their own satellite dishes.
Precisely because the Indian state opted for a globalization strat gy in 1991 and abandoned fifty years of socialismwhich had brought ts foreign reserves to near zero New Delhi had reserves in 2004 of 100 billion, giving it the resources to help more of its people into the lat arena.
amesh Ramanathan, an Indian-born former Citibank executive who eturned to India to lead an NGO called Janaagraha, dedicated to im roving local governance, is precisely the kind of new populist I have in ind.
"In India," he said, "clients of public education are sending a signal bout the quality of service delivery: Whoever can afford to opt out does o.
[But] in fact, in some of these, like water supply nd sanitation, the poor are actually not even getting the same basic ser ices as the middle class and the rich.
Getting NGOs that can collaborate on the local level to nsure that the poor get the infrastructure and budgets to which they are ntitled could have a major impact on poverty alleviation.
This ovement had a lot of energy and a lot of mobilizing capacity.
The activist groups that are elping alleviate poverty the most are those working at the local village evel in places like rural India, Africa, and China to spotlight and fight HE UNFLAT WORLD orruption and to promote accountability, transparency, education, and roperty rights.
Just ask any Indian villager.
ollaboration in poverty alleviation is not just for NGOs.
The rural poor in India, Africa, and China epresent a huge market, and it is possible to make money there and serve hemif companies are ready to collaborate horizontally with the poor.
ne of the most interesting examples I have come across of this form of ollaboration is a program run by Hewlett-Packard.
In order to answer that uestion, HP created a public-private partnership with the national gov rnment in India and the local government in Andhra Pradesh.
To help the villagers (many of them illiterate) express them elves, HP used a concept called graphic facilitation, whereby when eople voiced their dreams and aspirations, a visual artist whom HP rought over from the United States drew images of those aspirations on raft paper put up on the walls around the room.
Even after buying all their supplies from HP and sharing some of he revenue with HP, the women in the photography group doubled heir family incomes.
HP, meanwhile, has started working ith an NGO to train multiple women's groups with the same mobile hotography studio, and there is a potential here for HP to sell the studios o NGOs all over India, with all of them using HP ink and other supplies.
nd from India, who knows where?
All of this helps to xplain the emergence of one of the most dangerous unflattening forces odaythe suicide bombers of al-Qaeda and the other Islamist terror or anizations, who are coming out of the Muslim world and Muslim com unities in Europe.
he Arab-Muslim world is a vast, diverse civilization, encompassing ver one billion people and stretching from Morocco to Indonesia and rom Nigeria all the way to the suburbs of London.
One of the most obvious s the festering Arab-Israeli conflict, and the Israeli occupation of Pale tinian land and East Jerusalema grievance that has a powerful emo ional hold on the Arab-Muslim imagination and has long soured elations with America and the West.
This anger also has to do with the frustration of Arabs and uslims at having to live, in many, many cases, under authoritarian overnments, which not only deprive their people of a voice in their own uture, but have deprived tens of millions of young people in particular f opportunities to achieve their full potential through good jobs and odern schools.
Because y column with my picture runs in Arabic in the leading pan-Arab ewspaper, the London-based Al-Sharq Al-Awsat, and because I often ppear on Arab satellite-television news programs, many people in that art of the world know what I look like.
I have been amazed by the num er of young Arabs and Muslims men and womenwho have come p to me on the streets of Cairo or in the Arabian Gulf since 9/11 and aid to me what one young man in Al-Azhar mosque did one Friday, af er noon prayer: "You're Friedman, aren't you?"
he question is relevant to a book about the flat world for a very imple reason: Should there be another attack on the United States of he magnitude of 9/11, or worse, walls would go up everywhere and the lattening of the world would be set back for a long, long time.
hat, of course, is precisely what the Islamists want.
When terrorists ake instruments from our daily livesthe car, the airplane, the tennis hoe, the cell phoneand turn them into weapons of indiscriminate vi lence, they reduce trust.
Trust is essential for a flat world, here you have supply chains involving ten, a hundred, or a thousand eople, most of whom have never met face-to-face.
he founders of al-Qaeda are not religious fundamentalists per se.
I like to call them Islamo-Leninists.
I use the term "Leninists" to onvey the utopian-totalitarian vision of al-Qaeda as well as its self-image.
s al-Qaeda's chief ideologist, Ayman al-Zawahiri, has put it, al-Qaeda is he ideological vanguard, whose attacks on the United States and other estern targets are designed to mobilize and energize the Muslim asses to rise up against their own corrupt rulers, who are propped up by merica.
Like all good Leninists, the Islamo-Leninists are certain that he Muslim masses are deeply dissatisfied with their lot and that one or wo spectacular acts of jihad against the "pillars of tyranny" in the West ill spark them to overthrow the secularizing, immoral, and unjust ArabMuslim regimes that have defiled Islam.
Fascism and Marxism-Leninism grew out of the rapid in ustrialization and modernization of Germany and Central Europe, here communities living in tightly bonded villages and extended fami ies suddenly got shattered and the sons and fathers went off to the urban reas to work for big industrial companies.
In this age of transitions, oung men in particular lost a sense of identity, rootedness, and personal ignity that had been provided by traditional social structures.
in Laden offered the same sort of ideological response for young rabs and Muslims.
The first person to recognize the Islamo-Leninist haracter of these 9/11 hijackersthat they were not fundamentalists but dherents of an extreme, violent political cultwas Adrian Karatnycky, he president of Freedom House.
Indeed, the top 9/11 operatives and ilots, like Mohammed Atta and Marwan al-Shehhi, who shared an partment in Hamburg, where they both attended the Technical Univer ity of Hamburg-Harburg, all seem to have been recruited to al-Qaeda hrough cells and prayer groups after they moved to Europe.
To he contrary, virtually all of them seem to have lived in Europe on their wn, grown alienated from the European society around them, gravitated o a local prayer group or mosque to find warmth and solidarity, undergone  "born-again" conversion, gotten radicalized by Islamist elements, gone ff for training in Afghanistan, and presto, a terrorist was born.
"To nderstand the September 11 terrorists, we should have in mind the profile f the classic revolutionary: deracinated, middle class, shaped in part by ex le.
In other words, the image of Lenin in Zurich; or of Pol Pot or Ho Chi inh in Paris... For them Islamism is the new universal revolutionary reed, and bin Laden is Sheikh Guevara," writes Karatnycky.
"Like the eaders of America's Weather Underground, Germany's Baader-Meinhof  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ang, Italy's Red Brigades, and Japan's Red Army Faction, the Islamic errorists were university-educated converts to an all-encompassing neototalitarian ideology."
It doesn't necessarily solve any social prob em.
The system is what we call Islamisman ideological, highly oliticized Islam, in which the spiritual contentthe personal relation hip [with God]  is taken out of Islam and instead it is transformed into  religious ideology like fascism or communism."
But unlike the Lenin sts, who wanted to install the reign of the perfect class, the working class, nd unlike Nazis, who wanted to install the reign of the perfect race, the ryan race, bin Laden and al-Zawahiri wanted to install the reign of the erfect religion.
They have been raised to believe hat Islam is the most perfect and complete expression of God's monothe stic message and that the Prophet Muhammad is God's last and most per- HE UNFLAT WORLD eet messenger.
these young Arabs and uslims must ask themselves.
t is also the sort of dissonance that leads many others, average folks, to ive radical groups like al-Qaeda passive support.
They do this in defiance of their authoritarian govern ents, which prefer to use their media not to encourage honest debate ut rather to blame all their problems on others on America, on Israel, r on a legacy of Western colonialism, on anything and anyone but the ead hand of these authoritarian regimes.
ccording to the second Arab Human Development Report, which as written in 2003 for the United Nations Development Program by a roup of courageous Arab social scientists, between 1980 and 1999, Arab ountries produced 171 international patents.
South Korea alone during hat same period registered 16,328 patents.
Hewlett-Packard registers, on verage, 11 new patents a day.
The average number of scientists and engi eers working in research and development in the Arab countries is 371 er million people, while the world average, including countries in Africa, sia, and Latin America, is 979, the report said.
This helps to explain why lthough massive amounts of foreign technology are imported to the Arab egions, very little of it is internalized or supplanted by Arab innovations.
There  H E W O R L D IS F L A T re just eighteen computers per one thousand people in the Arab region oday, compared with the global average of seventy-eight per one thou and, and only 1.6 percent of the Arab population has Internet access.
hile Arabs represent almost 5 percent of the world population, the re ort said, they produce only 1 percent of the books published, and an un sually high percentage of those are religious booksover triple the orld average.
Of the eighty-eight million unemployed males between fif een and twenty-four worldwide, almost 26 percent are in the Middle East nd North Africa, according to an International Labor Organization study Associated Press, December 26, 2004).
But the good jobs are not being produced at home, because he environment of openness required to attract international investment nd stimulate local innovation is all too rare in the Arab-Muslim world oday.
He wrote an essay in the urban policy magazine City Journal Spring 2004) about what he learned from his contacts with Muslim outh in British prisons.
And the problem is that so many Muslims ant both stagnation and power: they want a return to the perfection of the HE UNFLAT WORLD eventh century and to dominate the twenty-first, as they believe is the irthright of their doctrine, the last testament of God to man.
ndeed, talk to young Arabs and Muslims anywhere, and this cogni ive dissonance and the word "humiliation" always come up very quickly n conversation.
It was revealing that when Mahathir Mohammed made is October 16,2003, farewell speech as prime minister of Malaysia at an slamic summit he was hosting in his own country, he built his remarks o his fellow Muslim leaders around the question of why their civilization ad become so humiliateda term he used five times.
It has always been my view that terrorism s not spawned by the poverty of money.
It is spawned by the poverty of ignity.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T s my friend the Egyptian playwright Ali Salem said of the 9/11 hijack rs, they "are walking the streets of life, searching for tall buildingsfor owers to bring down, because they are not able to be'tall like them."
On March 7, the Web site of the Islamic Studies and Research enter published the entire text.
Because what in Laden was referring to was the first Arab Human Development eport, which came out in July 2002, well after he had been evicted rom Afghanistan and was probably hiding out in a cave somewhere.
It could have been Norway or Italy, but Spain happened to have HE UNFLAT WORLD  GDP just slightly larger than all the Arab states together.
Somehow, bin aden heard or read about this first Arab Human Development Report rom his cave.
Or maybe he got it off the Internet.
The report was down oaded from the Internet some one million times.
And when he heard that comparison, wherever he as hiding, bin Laden took it as an insult, as a humiliationthe notion hat Christian Spain, a country that was once controlled by Muslims, had  greater GDP today than all the Arab states combined.
The authors of his report were themselves Arabs and Muslims; they were not trying to umiliate anyonebut that was how bin Laden interpreted it.
They may ven have broadband now in Tora Bora.
Want to nderstand why the Islamo-Leninists behead Americans in Iraq and audi Arabia and then distribute pictures on the Internet with the bloody ead of the body resting on the headless corpse?
It is no accident that the groups in Iraq who beheaded mericans dressed them first in the same orange jumpsuits that al-Qaeda risoners in Guantanamo Bay are forced to wear.
They had to learn bout those jumpsuits either over the Internet or satellite TV.
But it mazes me that in the middle of the Iraq war they were able to have the xact same jumpsuits made in Iraq to dress their prisoners in.
And what do you suppose terrorist leader bu Musab al-Zarqawi said in his audiotape released on September 11, 004, the third anniversary of 9/11?
s I said, however, this frustration and humiliation are not confined to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he Islamistfringes.The reason the Islamo-Leninists have become the most nergized and pronounced opponents of globalization/Americanization nd the biggest threat to the flattening of the world today is not simply their xtraordinary violence, but also that they enjoy some passive support round the Arab-Muslim world.
While Arab egimes have been very active in jailing their Islamo-Leninists when they an find and arrest them, they have been very passive in countering them ith a modern, progressive interpretation of Islam.
Having ome to power by force, they have no credibility as carriers of a moderate, rogressive Islam, and they always feel vulnerable to hard-line Muslim reachers, who denounce them for not being good Muslims.
ut the other reason for the passive support that the Islamo-Leninists njoyand the fact that they are able to raise so much money through harities and mosques in the Arab-Muslim world is that too many ood, decent people there feel the same frustration and tinge of humili tion that many of their most enraged youth do.
hen I visited Qatar a few months after 9/11, a friend of mine there a weet, thoughtful, liberal person who works for the Qatari government onfided to me something in a whisper that was deeply troubling to him: My eleven-year-old son thinks bin Laden is a good man."
ost middle-class Arabs and Muslims, I am convinced, were not cel brating the death of three thousand innocent Americans on 9/11.1 know y Arab and Muslim friends were not.
But many Arabs and Muslims ere celebrating the idea of putting a fist in America's faceand they ere quietly applauding the men who did it.
They were happy to see omeone humiliating the people and the country that they felt was hu iliating them and supporting what they saw as injustice in their orldwhether it is America's backing of Arab kings and dictators who HE UNFLAT WORLD xport oil to it or America's backing of Israel whether it does the right hings or the wrong things.
ost American blacks, I am sure, had little doubt that O. J. Simpson urdered his ex-wife, but they applauded his acquittal as a stick in the ye of the Los Angeles Police Department and a justice system that they aw as consistently humiliating and unfair to them.
I once interviewed Dyab Abou Jahjah, often alled the Malcolm X of Belgium's alienated Moroccan youth.
He said, "I think if we are honest with ourselves, ost of the Muslims all over the world felt that.
Supporting the bullies in the region, whether it s Israel or our own regimes, [America] is giving us not only a bleeding ose, but breaking a lot of our necks."
ust as America's economic depression in the 1920s and 1930s made any normal, intelligent, thinking Americans passive or active support rs of communism, so the humiliating economic, military, and emo ional depression of the Arab-Muslim world has made too many normal, ntelligent, and thinking Arabs and Muslims passive supporters of bin adenism.
ormer Kuwaiti minister of information Dr. Sa'd Bin Tefla, a jour alist, wrote an essay in the London Arabic daily Al-Sharq Al-Awsat on he third anniversary of September 11 titled "We Are All Bin Laden," hich went right to this point.
He asked why it is that Muslim scholars nd clerics eagerly supported fatwas condemning Salman Rushdie to eath for writing an allegedly blasphemous novel, The Satanic Verses, that ove in themes about the Prophet Muhammad, but to this day no uslim cleric has issued a fatwa condemning Osama bin Laden for mur ering three thousand innocent civilians.
After the fatwa was declared gainst Salman Rushdie, Muslims staged protests against the book at ritish embassies all over the Islamic world and burned Salman Rushdie  H E W O R L D IS F L A T olls along with copies of his book.
Nine people were killed in an antiRushdie protest in Pakistan.
Religious legal rulings were disseminated one after another banning alman Rushdie s book and calling for him to be killed ," Bin Tefla wrote.
"Despite the fact that bin Laden murdered housands of innocents in the name of our religion and despite the dam ge that he has caused to Muslims everywhere, and especially to innocent uslims in the West, whose life is much better than the life of Muslims n Islamic lands, to this date not a single fatwa has been issued calling for he killing of bin Laden, on the pretext that bin Laden still proclaims there is no God other than Allah,'" Tefla wrote.
ermany was humiliated after World War I, but it had the modern conomic foundations to produce a state response to that humiliation  n the form of the Third Reich.
ut bin Laden and Yamani were only the illusions of power, noted zrahi: The Saudi oil weapon is economic power without productivity, nd bin Laden's terrorism weapon is military force without a real army, tate, economy, and engine of innovation to support it.
hat makes Yamanism and bin Ladenism so unfortunate as strategies or Arab influence in the world is that they ignore the examples within HE UNFLAT WORLD rab culture and civilizationwhen it was at its heightof discipline, ard work, knowledge, achievement, scientific inquiry, and pluralism.
As ayan Chanda, the editor of YaleGlobal Online, pointed out to me, it as the Arab-Muslim world that gave birth to algebra and algorithms, oth terms derived from Arabic words.
The best thing outsiders can do for the Arab-Muslim world today is try o collaborate with its progressive forces in every way possiblefrom try ng to solve the Arab-Israeli conflict, to stabilizing Iraq, to signing freetrade agreements with as many Arab countries as possibleso as to foster  similar war of ideas within their civilization.
One of the best-known and most respected Arab journalists orking today, he wrote the following, in Al-Sharq Al-Awsat (September , 2004), after a series of violent incidents involving Muslim extremist roups from Chechnya to Saudi Arabia to Iraq: "Self-cure starts with selfrealization and confession.
We should then run after our terrorist sons, in  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he full knowledge that they are the sour grapes of a deformed culture .
Then came the neo-Muslims.
If millions of people from India, hina, Latin America, and the former Soviet Empire, who for years had een living largely outside the flat world, all start to walk onto the new flatworld platformeach with his or her own version of the American dream f owning a car, a house, a refrigerator, a microwave, and a toasterwe re, at best, going to experience a serious energy shortage.
HE UNFLAT WORLD n his classic work Collapse, Jared Diamond points out that when hinking about the issue of sustainability, what counts is not just the umber of people inhabiting the planet Earth but the impact that their articular lifestyle is having on the environment.
On the average, each citizen of the U.S., Western Europe and Japan onsumes 32 times more resources, such as fossil fuels, and puts out 32 imes more waste, than do inhabitants of the Third World.
I ound that statistic so unbelievable that I asked Michael Zhao, a young esearcher in the Times's Beijing bureau, to double-check it, and he rote me back the following e-mail: i Tom, Hope this email finds you well.
On your question about ow many cars are added each day in Beijing, I did some research n the Internet and found that... car sales in [Beijing] for April 004 were 43,00024.1% more than same period last year.
Since then, coupled with dropping car rices due to China's commitment to reduce tariffs after joining he WTO, a large number of families have advanced their time able of buying a car, although some others decided to wait for fur her drops of prices.
Already, ac ording to the World Bank, sixteen of the twenty most polluted cities in the orld are in China, and that pollution and environmental degradation to ether cost China $170 billion a year (The Economist, August 21, 2004).
China, with its own oil and gas eserves, was once a net exporter.
In 2003, China surged head of Japan as the second largest importer of oil in the world, after the nited States.
China's overall energy consumption is up 65 percent just rom 2002 to 2005, and it has not even begun to reach its capacity for in ustrialization.
here is a Wal-Mart in Shenzhen, China, that sold 1,100 air condi ioners in just one hot weekend in the summer of 2005.
hink of the environmental impact when there is a Wal-Mart in every ajor Chinese city.
ight now, about 700 to 800 million of China's 1.3 billion people still ive in the countryside, but they are heading for the flat world, and oughly half are expected to try to migrate to the cities over the next two ecades.
No wonder then that a report in the inancial Times (August 16, 2005) noted that global energy demand has een growing since 2003 at about 2.5 times the rate of the prior decade, ith China and India accounting for about 35 percent of the world's in remental increase in oil consumption, even though they account for ust 15 percent of world output.
t the business conference I was attending in Beijing, I kept hearing eferences to the Strait of Malaccathe narrow passage between Malay ia and Indonesia that is patrolled by the U.S. Navy and controls all the il tanker traffic from the Middle East to China and Japan.
But evidently Chinese strategic planners have begun to grow in reasingly concerned that the United States could choke off China's conomy at any time by just closing the Strait of Malacca, and this threat s now being increasingly and openly discussed in Chinese military cir-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T les.
It is just a small hint of the potential struggle for powerenergy owerthat could ensue if the Great American Dream and the Great hinese Dream and the Great Indian Dream and the Great Russian ream come to be seen as mutually exclusive in energy terms.
on't kid yourself: China's foreign policy today consists of just two hingspreventing Taiwan from becoming independent and searching or oil and other natural resources.
"It is not a conspiracy on our part," a hinese foreign ministry official said to me of China's global quest for oil.
hina is particularly obsessed with acquiring secure oil supplies from ountries that would not retaliate against China if it invaded Taiwan, and his is driving Beijing to get cozy with some of the most despotic regimes n the world.
And the more desperate China becomes for oil, the more igorously it will use its veto at the UN Security Council to prevent sanc ions against its newfound providers of crude no matter what horrible hings they are doing on the world stage.
The Islamic fundamentalist gov rnment in Sudan now supplies China with 7 percent of its oil supplies, nd China has invested $3 billion in oil-drilling infrastructure there.
In eptember 2004, China threatened to veto a move by the United Nations o impose sanctions on Sudan for the genocide that it is perpetrating in its arfur province.
China has only reluctantly joined international efforts to revent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon.
Iran supplies 13 percent f China's oil supplies.
Meanwhile, as The Daily Telegraph reported November 19, 2004), China has begun drilling for gas in the East China ea, just west of the line that Japan regards as its border: "Japan protested, o no avail, that the project should be a joint one.
The two are also set to lash over Russia's oil wealth.
China is furious that Japan has outbid it in heir battle to determine the route of the pipeline that Russia intends to uild to the Far East."
At the same time it was reported that a Chinese nu lear submarine had accidentally strayed into Japanese territorial waters.
.. n 2004, China began competing with the United States for oil ex loration opportunities in Canada and Venezuela.
If China has its way, HE UNFLAT WORLD t will stick a straw into Canada and Venezuela and suck out every drop f oil, which will have the side effect of making America more depen ent on Saudi Arabia.
interviewed the Japanese manager of a major U.S. multinational hat is headquartered in northeastern China.
"China is following the ath of Japan and Korea," said the executive, on the condition that he nd his company not be quoted by name, "and the big question is, Can he world afford to have 1.3 billion people following that path and driv ng the same cars and using the same amount of energy?
The oil crisis in the 1970s coincided with Japan and urope rising.
[There was a time] when the U.S. was the only big con umer of oil, but when Japan and Europe came in, OPEC got the power.
ut when China and India come into being the consumers, it will be a uge challenge that is an order of magnitude different.
We ot smarter than before, equipment became more efficient, and energy onsumption per head was lower.
But now [with China, India, and ussia all coming on strong] it is multiplied by a factor of ten.
We cannot restrict China, Russia,] and India.
ne thing we will not be able to do is tell young Indians, Russians, oles, or Chinese that just when they are arriving on the leveled playing ield, they have to hold back and consume less for the greater global ood.
While giving a talk to students at the Beijing College of Foreign ffairs, I spoke about the most important issues that could threaten lobal stability, including the competition for oil and other energy re ources that would naturally occur as China, India, and the former oviet Union began to consume more oil.
No sooner did I finish than a oung Chinese woman student shot up her hand and basically asked: Why should China have to restrain its energy consumption and worry bout the environment, when America and Europe got to consume all he energy they wanted when they were developing?"
China is a high-pride country.
Telling China, India, and ussia to consume less could have the same geopolitical impact that the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T orld's inability to accommodate a rising Japan and Germany had after orld War I. f current trends hold, China will go from importing seven million bar els of oil today to fourteen million a day by 2012.
For the world to accom odate that increase, it would have to find another Saudi Arabia.
"For geopolitical rea ons, we cannot tell them no, we cannot tell China and India, it is not your urn," said Philip K. Verleger Jr., a leading oil economist.
Second, we will be strengthening some of the worst po itical systems in the worldlike Sudan, Iran, and Saudi Arabia.
Already, the newspaper eadlines in China every day are about energy shortages, blackouts, and rownouts.
U.S. officials estimate that twenty-four out of China's thirty-one rovinces are now experiencing power shortages.
Already, noted Prickett, f you look at what is happening in the Congo Basin, the Amazon, the rain orest of Indonesiathe last great wilderness areasyou find that they are eing devoured by China's growing appetite.
More and more palm oil is eing extracted from Indonesia and Malaysia, soybeans out of Brazil, tim er out of central Africa, and natural gas out of all of the above to serve hinaand, as a result, all sorts of natural habitats are threatened.
he move to sharply reduce energy consumption has to come from HE UNFLAT WORLD ithin China, as the Chinese confront what the need for fossil fuel is do ng to their own environment and growth aspirations.
Listen to China's deputy minister of the environ ent, Pan Yue, in a stunning interview with Der Spiegel (March 7, 005): "Our raw materials are scarce, we don't have enough land, and ur population is constantly growing.
Currently, there are 1.3 billion eople living in China, that's twice as many as 50 years ago.
In 2020, here will be 1.5 billion people in China.
[China's GDP miracle] will end oon because the environment can no longer keep pace .
If the gap between the poor nd the rich widens, then regions within China and the society as a hole will become unstable."
he best thing we in the United States can do to nudge China toward reater conservation is to set an example by changing our own con umption patterns.
Restoring our moral standing on energy is now a vital national security nd environmental issue," said Verleger.
The second best thing we can o is put America's best brainpower and biggest economic muscles be ind developing emissions-free energy technologies and getting down he innovation and costs curves quickly so they hit the "China price"  he price at which China and other developing countries could afford to uy and deploy them at scale.
merica could do this today, but it would require an energy strategy hat is not simply the "sum of all lobbies," says Gal Luff, founding mem er of the Set America Free Coalition, a bipartisan alliance of national ecurity, labor, environmental, and religious groups that believe reduc ng our oil consumption is a national priority.
he reluctance of the Bush team to develop such a comprehensive eo-green strategywhich would strengthen the dollar, reduce our trade eficit, make America the world leader in combating climate change, nd stimulate U.S. companies to take the lead in producing the green echnologies that the world will desperately need as China and India in ustrializehas been so irresponsible that it takes your breath away.
All we need is some leadership.
The worst energy eficit we have right now is among our leaderswho lack the energy to magine alternatives to the path we are on and lack the will to push us in  new, geo-green direction.
It will require a president and a Congress with the uts to undertake a "Green New Deal"where government's role is not unding vast projects, like the original New Deal, but seeding basic re earch, providing loan guarantees where needed, and setting standards, egulations, taxes, and incentives that will shape the market and spawn ne thousand new clean-tech companies, focused on everything from ower generation to biofuels to more efficient transportation to green uildings.
Green New Deal today requires getting two things right: govern ent regulations and prices.
By setting steadily igher standards for the energy efficiency of buildings and appliances  nd creating incentives for utilities to work with consumers to use less HE UNFLAT WORLD owerCalifornia has held its per capita electricity use roughly constant or thirty years, while the rest of the nation has seen per capita electricity se increase by nearly 50 percent, according to the Natural Resources efense Council.
This kind of energy conservation has saved California rom building twenty-four giant power plants.
High standards force in ovation, and innovation leads to conservation at scale.
"The regulated utilities are the most important consumers from the erspective of long-term investment, and if they are not required to value arbon reduction, then they will underinvest in energy efficiency and re ewable energy," said Peter Darbee, chairman of Pacific Gas & Electric.
ny energy policy that does not have increasingly high efficiency stan ards and higher prices for fossil fuels is not an energy policy at all.
The business community s already moving, because more and more companies are finding that perating clean and green saves money and is a competitive advantage.
o enough of this nonsense that conservation, energy efficiency, and environmentalism are hobbies we can't afford.
Dell has six factories around HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T P R E V E N T I O N he world in Limerick, Ireland; Xiamen, China; Eldorado do Sul, razil; Nashville, Tennessee; Austin, Texas; and Penang, Malaysia.
My rder went out by e-mail to the Dell notebook factory in Malaysia, where he parts for the computer were immediately ordered from the supplier ogistics centers (SLCs) next to the Penang factory.
Every two hours, the Dell factory in Penang sends an e-mail to the arious SLCs nearby, telling each one what parts and what quantities of hose parts it wants delivered within the next ninety minutesand not ne minute later.
o begin with, he said, the notebook was codesigned in Austin, Texas, and n Taiwan by a team of Dell engineers and a team of Taiwanese notebook esigners.
"The customer's needs, required technologies, and Dell's de ign innovations were all determined by Dell through our direct rela ionship with customers," he explained.
"The basic design of the otherboard and case the basic functionality of your machinewas esigned to those specifications by an ODM [original design manufac-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T urer] in Taiwan.
On April 13, at 0:15 a.m., a Dell Malaysia worker pulled the order slip that automati ally popped up once all my parts had arrived from the SLCs to the enang factory.
Another Dell Malaysia employee then took out a "trav ler"a special carrying tote designed to hold and protect partsand tarted plucking all the parts that went into my notebook.
So here are the key suppliers for my Inspiron 600m note ook: The Intel microprocessor came from an Intel factory either in the hilippines, Costa Rica, Malaysia, or China.
The memory came from a orean-owned factory in Korea (Samsung), a Taiwanese-owned factory in aiwan (Nanya), a German-owned factory in Germany (Infineon), or a apanese-owned factory in Japan (Elpida).
My graphics card was shipped rom either a Taiwanese-owned factory in China (MSI) or a Chinese-run actory in China (Foxconn).
The cooling fan came from a Taiwaneseowned factory in Taiwan (CCI or Auras).
The motherboard came from ei her a Korean-owned factory in Shanghai (Samsung), a Taiwanese-owned actory in Shanghai (Quanta), or a Taiwanese-owned factory in Taiwan Compal or Wistron).
The keyboard came from either a Japanese-owned ompany in Tianjin, China (Alps), a Taiwanese-owned factory in Shen- HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T P R E V E N T I O N hen, China (Sunrex), or a Taiwanese-owned factory in Suzhou, China Darfon).
The L C D was made in either South Korea (Samsung or G.Philips LCD), Japan (Toshiba or Sharp), or Taiwan (Chi Mei ptoelectronics, Hannstar Display, or AU Optronics).
The wireless card ame from either an American-owned factory in China (Agere) or alaysia (Arrow), or a Taiwanese-owned factory in Taiwan (Askey or emtek) or China (USI).
The modem was made by either a Taiwaneseowned company in China (Asustek or Liteon) or a Chinese-run com any in China (Foxconn).
The battery came from an American-owned actory in Malaysia (Motorola), a Japanese-owned factory in Mexico or alaysia or China (Sanyo), or a South Korean or Taiwanese factory in ither of those two countries (SDI or Simplo).
The hard disk drive was ade by an American-owned factory in Singapore (Seagate), a Japaneseowned company in Thailand (Hitachi or Fujitsu), or a Japanese-owned actory in the Philippines (Toshiba).
The CD/DVD drive came from a outh Korean-owned company with factories in Indonesia and the hilippines (Samsung); a Japanese-owned factory in China or Malaysia NEC); a Japanese-owned factory in Indonesia, China, or Malaysia Teac); or a Japanese-owned factory in China (Sony).
The notebook car ying bag was made by either an Irish-owned company in China (Tenba) r an American-owned company in China (Targus, Samsonite, or Pacific esign).
The power adapter was made by either a Thai-owned factory in hailand (Delta) or a Taiwanese-, Korean-, or American-owned factory in hina (Liteon, Samsung, or Mobility).
The power cord was made by a ritish-owned company with factories in China, Malaysia, and India Volex).
The removable memory stick was made by either an Israeliowned company in Israel (M-System) or an American-owned company ith a factory in Malaysia (Smart Modular).
"Michael [Dell] ersonally knows the CEOs of these companies, and we are constantly orking with them on process improvements and real-time demand/ upply balancing."
Dell has huge erver banks stocked with the latest in Microsoft, Norton Utilities, and ther popular software applications, which are downloaded into each ew computer according to the specific tastes of the customer.
ix days a week Dell charters a China Airlines 747 out of Taiwan and HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION lies it from Penang to Nashville via Taipei.
hat was thirteen days after I'd ordered it.
Had there not been a parts elay in Malaysia when my order first arrived, the time between when I honed in my purchase, when the notebook was assembled in Penang, nd its arrival in Nashville would have been only four days.
Hunter said he total supply chain for my computer, including suppliers of suppliers, nvolved about four hundred companies in North America, Europe, and rimarily Asia, but with thirty key players.
It could be China deciding once and for all to eliminate Taiwan as n independent state; or North Korea, out of fear or insanity, using one of ts nuclear weapons against South Korea or Japan; or Israel and a soon-tobe-nuclear Iran going at each other; or India and Pakistan finally nuking t out.
What is certain, though, is that as the world flattens, ne of the most interesting dramas to watch in international relations ill be the interplay between the traditional global threats and the newly mergent global supply chains.
The interaction between old-time threats like China versus Taiwan) and just-in-time supply chains (like China lus Taiwan) will be a rich source of study for the field of international elations in the early twenty-first century.
In that spirit, and again with tongue slightly in cheek,  offer the Dell Theory of Conflict Prevention, the essence of which is hat the advent and spread of just-in-time global supply chains in the flat orld are an even greater restraint on geopolitical adventurism than the ore general rising standard of living that McDonald's symbolized.
ecause people embedded in major global supply chains don't want to ight old-time wars anymore.
My belief after visiting hina is that the change that has occurred there is in the best interest of he world and China.
ny sort of war or prolonged political upheaval in East Asia or China would have a massive chilling effect on the investment there and on all he progress that has been made there," said Dell, who added that he be ieves the governments in that part of the world understand this very learly.
And China is just now starting to evelop a level of credibility in the business community that it is creating  business environment you can prosper inwith transparent and consis ent rules."
Neland said that suppliers regularly ask him whether he is orried about China and Taiwan, which have threatened to go to war at everal points in the past half century, but his standard response is that he annot imagine them "doing anything more than flexing muscles with ach other."
Neland said he can tell in his conversations and dealings ith companies and governments in the Dell supply chain, particularly he Chinese, that "they recognize the opportunity and are really hungry o participate in the same things they have seen other countries in Asia do.
hey know there is a big economic pot at the end of the rainbow and they re really after it.
We will spend about $35 billion producing parts this ear, and 30 percent of that is [in] China."
f you follow the evolution of supply chains, added Neland, you see he prosperity and stability they promoted first in Japan, and then in orea and Taiwan, and now in Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines, hailand, and Indonesia.
Osamu Watanabe, the C E O of the Japan External rade Organization, was explaining to me one afternoon in Tokyo how apanese companies were moving vast amounts of low- and middlerange technical work and manufacturing to China, doing the basic fab ication there, and then bringing it back to Japan for final assembly.
apan was doing this despite a bitter legacy of mistrust between the two ountries, which was intensified by the Japanese invasion of China in he last century.
Historically, he noted, a strong Japan and a strong China HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION ave had a hard time coexisting.
The reason you can have a strong Japan and a trong China at the same time, he said, "is because of the supply chain."
bviously, since Iraq, Syria, south Lebanon, North Korea, Pakistan, fghanistan, and Iran are not part of any major global supply chains, all of hem remain hot spots that could explode at any time and slow or reverse he flattening of the world.
As my own notebook story attests, the most im ortant test case of the Dell Theory of Conflict Prevention is the situation etween China and Taiwansince both are deeply embedded in several f the world's most important computer, consumer electronics, and, in reasingly, software supply chains.
The vast majority of computer compo ents for every major company come from coastal China, Taiwan, and ast Asia.
In addition, Taiwan alone has more than $100 billion in in estments in mainland China today, and Taiwanese experts run many of he cutting-edge Chinese high-tech manufacturing companies.
t is no wonder that Craig Addison, the former editor of Electronic usiness Asia magazine, wrote an essay for the International Herald Tribune September 29, 2000) headlined "A 'Silicon Shield' Protects Taiwan from hina."
He argued that "Silicon-based products, such as computers and etworking systems, form the basis of the digital economies in the United tates, Japan and other developed nations.
In the past decade, Taiwan as become the third-largest information technology hardware producer fter the United States and Japan.
Military aggression by China against aiwan would cut off a large portion of the world's supply of these prod cts .
Such a development would wipe trillions of dollars off the mar et value of technology companies listed in the United States, Japan and urope."
Even if China's leaders, like former president Jiang Zemin, ho was once minister of electronics, lose sight of how integrated China nd Taiwan are in the world's computer supply chain, they need only ask heir kids for an update.
Jiang Zemin's son, Jiang Mianheng, wrote ddison, "is a partner in a wafer fabrication project in Shanghai with inston Wang of Taiwan's Grace T.H.W.
Hundreds of big American tech companies now have R & D perations in China; a war that disrupted them could lead not only to the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ompanies moving their plants elsewhere but also to a significant loss of  & D investment in China, which the Beijing government has been bet ing on to advance its development.
Such a war could also, depending on ow it started, trigger a widespread American boycott of Chinese goods f China were to snuff out the Taiwanese democracywhich would lead o serious economic turmoil inside China.
President Chen Shui-bian's proindependence Democratic Progressive Party was expected to win the egislative runoff over the main opposition Nationalist Party, which fa ored closer ties with Beijing.
Chen framed the election as a popular ref rendum on his proposal to write a new constitution that would formally nshrine Taiwan's independence, ending the purposely ambiguous sta us quo.
Had Chen won and moved ahead on his agenda to make aiwan its own motherland, as opposed to maintaining the status quo fic ion that it is a province of the mainland, it could have led to a Chinese ilitary assault on Taiwan.
A ma ority of Taiwanese voted against the pro-independence governing party egislative candidates, ensuring that the DPP would not have a majority n parliament.
I believe the message Taiwanese voters were sending was ot that they never want Taiwan to be independent.
It was that they do ot want to upset the status quo right now, which has been so beneficial o so many Taiwanese.
It guarantees only that govern ents whose countries are enmeshed in global supply chains will have o think three times, not just twice, about engaging in anything but a war HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION f self-defense.
T 7hile the biggest test case of the Dell Theory is China versus  V Taiwan, the fact is that the Dell Theory has already proved itself o some degree in the case of India and Pakistan, the context in which I irst started to think about it.
I happened to be in India in 2002, when its ust-in-time services supply chains ran into some very old-time geopoli icsand the supply chain won.
In the case of India and Pakistan, the ell Theory was working on only one partyIndiabut it still had a ajor impact.
India is to the world's knowledge and service supply chain hat China and Taiwan are to the manufacturing ones.
By now readers f this book know all the highlights: General Electric's biggest research enter outside the United States is in Bangalore, with seventeen hun red Indian engineers, designers, and scientists.
The brain chips for any brand-name cell phones are designed in Bangalore.
Tracing your lost luggage n Delta or British Airways is done from Bangalore, and the backroom ccounting and computer maintenance for scores of global firms are one from Bangalore, Mumbai, Chennai, and other major Indian cities.
ere's what happened: On May 31, 2002, State Department spokes an Richard Boucher issued a travel advisory saying, "We urge American itizens currently in India to depart the country," because the prospect of  nuclear exchange with Pakistan was becoming very real.
Both nations ere massing troops on their borders, intelligence reports were suggesting hat they both might be dusting off their nuclear warheads, and CNN as flashing images of people flooding out of India.
I was actually surfing on the Web, and I saw a travel advisory come  H E W O R L D IS F L A T p on India on a Friday evening," said Vivek Paul, president of Wipro, hich manages backroom operations from India of many American ultinationals.
This was not in the plan hen they decided to outsource mission-critical research and operations o India.
Said Paul, "I had a CIO from one of our big American clients end me an e-mail saying, 'I am now spending a lot of time looking for al ernative sources to India.
Paul would not tell me what company it was, but I have confirmed hrough diplomatic sources that it was United Technologies.
And plenty f others, like American Express and General Electric, with back rooms n Bangalore, had to have been equally worried.
or many global companies, "the main heart of their business is now upported here," said N. Krishnakumar, president of MindTree, another eading Indian knowledge outsourcing firm based in Bangalore.
While not trying to meddle in foreign ffairs, he added, "What we explained to our government, through the onfederation of Indian Industry, is that providing a stable, predictable op rating environment is now the key to India's development."
This was a eal education for India's elderly leaders in New Delhi, who had not fully bsorbed how critical India had become to the world's knowledge supply hain.
When you are managing vital backroom operations for American xpress or General Electric or Avis, or are responsible for tracing all the ost luggage on British Airways or Delta, you cannot take a month, a week, r even a day off for war without causing major disruptions for those com anies.
Once those companies have made a commitment to outsource usiness operations or research to India, they expect it to stay there.
he Indian government got the message.
Was India's central place in he world's services supply chain the only factor in getting Prime Minister ajpayee to tone down his rhetoric and step back from the brink?
There were other factors, to be suremost notably the de errent effect of Pakistan's own nuclear arsenal.
But clearly, India's role in lobal services was an important additional source of restraint on its be avior, and it was taken into account by New Delhi.
"I think it sobered a ot of people," said Jerry Rao, who heads the Indian high-tech trade asso iation.
"We engaged very seriously, and we tried to make the point that his was very bad for Indian business.
It was very bad for the Indian econ my .
"Ten years go, [a lobby of IT ministers from different Indian states] never existed," aid Kulkarni.
Now it is one of the most important business lobbies in ndia and a coalition that no Indian government can ignore.
With all due respect, the McDonald's [shutting] down doesn't hurt nything," said Vivek Paul, "but if Wipro had to shut down we would affect he day-to-day operations of many, many companies."
Many e-commerce sites that are supported  H E W O R L D IS F L A T rom Bangalore would shut down.
Many major companies that rely on ndia to maintain their key computer applications or handle their human esources departments or billings would seize up.
And these companies id not want to find alternatives, said Paul.
[We had ore to gain from building] a vibrant, richer middle class able to create an xport industry than we possibly could by having an ego-satisfying war with akistan."
The Indian government also looked around and realized that he vast majority of India's billion people were saying, "I want a better fu ure, not more territory."
Over and over again, when I asked young Indians orking at call centers how they felt about Kashmir or a war with Pakistan, hey waved me off with the same answer: "We have better things to do."
America needs to keep this in mind as it weighs its overall ap roach to outsourcing.
I would never advocate shipping some American's ob overseas just so it will keep Indians and Pakistanis at peace with one an ther.
ach of the Indian business leaders I interviewed noted that in the vent of some outrageous act of terrorism or aggression from Pakistan, ndia would do whatever it takes to defend itself, and they would be the irst to support thatthe Dell Theory be damned.
But the more India and, one hopes, soon akistan get enmeshed in global service supply chains, the greater disin entive they have to fight anything but a border skirmish or a war of words.
he example of the 2002 India-Pakistan nuclear crisis at least gives us HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION ome hope.
It is he emergence of mutant global supply chainsthat is, nonstate actors, e they criminals or terrorists, who learn to use all the elements of the flat orld to advance a highly destabilizing, even nihilistic agenda.
I first tarted thinking about this when Nandan Nilekani, the Infosys C E O , as giving me that tour I referred to in Chapter 1 of his company's global ideoconferencing center at its Bangalore headquarters.
As Nandan ex lained to me how Infosys could get its global supply chain together at nce for a virtual conference in that room, a thought popped into my ead: Who else uses uploading and supply-chaining so imaginatively?
he answer, of course, is al-Qaeda.
l-Qaeda has learned to use many of the same instruments for global ollaboration that Infosys uses, but instead of producing products and rofits with them, it has produced mayhem and murder.
The flat orldunfortunatelyis a friend of both Infosys and al-Qaeda.
These mutant global supply chains are formed for the purpose of estruction, not profit.
Yet these mobile, self-financing mutant supply chains use all he tools of collaboration offered by the flat worlduploading to raise  H E W O R L D IS F L A T oney, to recruit followers, and to stimulate and disseminate ideas; out ourcing to train recruits; and supply-chaining to distribute the tools nd the suicide bombers to undertake operations.
And its leaders and innovators understand the flat world al ost as well as Wal-Mart, Dell, and Infosys do.
What I am arguing here is that you cannot understand the rise f al-Qaeda technically without reference to the flattening of the world, ei her.
Globalization in general has been al-Qaeda's friend in that it has elped to solidify a revival of Muslim identity and solidarity, with Muslims n one country much better able to see and sympathize with the struggles f their brethren in another countrythanks to the Internet and satellite elevision.
At the same time, as I pointed out, this flattening process has in ensified the feelings of humiliation in some quarters of the Muslim world ver the fact that civilizations to which the Muslim world once felt supe iorHindus, Jews, Christians, Chineseare now all doing better than any Muslim countries, and everyone can see it.
There has been  proliferation of these informal mutual supply chains throughout the rab-Muslim world todaysmall networks of people who move money hrough hawalas (hand-to-hand financing networks), who recruit through lternative education systems like the madrassas, and who communicate hrough the Internet and other tools of the global information revolution.
Today, with the Internet, that is not a roblem.
Today even the Unabomber could find friends to join a consor ium where his "strengths" could be magnified and reinforced by others ho had just as warped a worldview as he did.
I can understand, but not accept, the notion that more than hirty-seven years of Israeli occupation of the West Bank might have riven some Palestinians into a suicidal rage.
From what we do know, though, this Virtual aliphate works just like the supply chains I described earlier.
he flat world has also been such a huge boon for al-Qaeda and its ilk ecause of the way it enables the small to act big, and the way it enables mall actsthe killing of just a few peopleto have big effects.
The hor ific video of the beheading of Wall Street Journal reporter Danny Pearl by slamist militants in Pakistan was transmitted by the Internet all over the orld.
But those same beheading videos are also used s tools of recruitment.
The flat world makes it much easier for terrorists o transmit their terror.
With the Internet they don't even have to go hrough Western or Arab news organizations but can broadcast right into our computer.
Just as the U.S. Army had embedded journalists, so the suicide upply chain has embedded terrorists, in their own way, to tell us their side f the story.
How many times have I gotten up in the morning, fired up he Internet, and been confronted by the video image of some masked unman threatening to behead an Americanall brought to me courtesy f AOL's home page?
The Internet is an enormously useful tool for the issemination of propaganda, conspiracy theories, and plain old untruths, ecause it combines a huge reach with a patina of technology that makes nything on the Internet somehow more believable.
The new system of diffusion the Internetis more likely to trans it irrationality than rationality," said political theorist Yaron Ezrahi, ho specializes in the interaction between media and politics.
And the Internet is the needle.
n many cases, networks like al-Qaeda use the Internetnot only for asy, cheap, global command and control but, even more important, as a lobal megaphone to radiate ideas.
abriel Weimann, a professor of communications at Haifa Univer ity, Israel, did an incisive study of terrorists' use of the Internet, which as published in March 2004 by the United States Institute of Peace and HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T REVENTION xcerpted on YaleGlobal Online on April 26, 2004.
He made the follow ng points: hile the danger that cyber-terrorism poses to the Internet is fre uently debated, surprisingly little is known about the threat osed by terrorists' use of the Internet.
A recent six-year-long study hows that terrorist organizations and their supporters have been sing all of the tools that the Internet offers to recruit supporters, aise funds, and launch a worldwide campaign of fear.
Our scan of the Internet in 2003-04 evealed the existence of hundreds of websites serving terrorists in ifferent, albeit sometimes overlapping, ways.
There are count ess examples of how [terrorists] use this uncensored medium to pread disinformation, to deliver threats intended to instill fear and elplessness, and to disseminate horrific images of recent actions.
ince September 11, 2001, al-Qaeda has festooned its websites ith a string of announcements of an impending "large attack" on S targets.
These warnings have received considerable media overage, which has helped to generate a widespread sense of read and insecurity among audiences throughout the world and specially within the United States.
he Internet has significantly expanded the opportunities for errorists to secure publicity.
Until the advent of the Internet, ter orists' hopes of winning publicity for their causes and activities de ended on attracting the attention of television, radio, or the print edia.
The fact that terrorists themselves have direct control over he content of their websites offers further opportunities to shape ow they are perceived by different target audiences and to ma ipulate their image and the images of their enemies.
Insteadregardless f their nature, motives, or locationmost terrorist sites empha ize two issues: the restrictions placed on freedom of expression; nd the plight of their comrades who are now political prisoners.
errorists have proven not only skillful at online marketing but lso adept at mining the data offered by the billion-some pages of he World Wide Web.
They can learn from the Internet about the chedules and locations of targets such as transportation facilities, uclear power plants, public buildings, airports and ports, and even ounterterrorism measures.
According to Secretary of Defense onald Rumsfeld, an al-Qaeda training manual recovered in fghanistan tells its readers, "Using public sources openly and ithout resorting to illegal means, it is possible to gather at least 0 percent of all information required about the enemy."
One aptured al-Qaeda computer contained engineering and struc ural architecture features of a dam, which had been downloaded rom the Internet and which would enable al-Qaeda engineers nd planners to simulate catastrophic failures.
In other captured omputers, U.S. investigators found evidence that al-Qaeda oper tors spent time on sites that offer software and programming nstructions for the digital switches that run power, water, trans ortation, and communications grids.
ike many other political organizations, terrorist groups use he Internet to raise funds.
The fighters in the Rus ian breakaway republic of Chechnya have likewise used the nternet to publicize the numbers of bank accounts to which sym athizers can contribute.
And in December 2001, the U.S. gov rnment seized the assets of a Texas-based charity because of its ies to Hamas.
n addition to soliciting financial aid online, terrorists recruit onverts by using the full panoply of website technologies (audio, HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION igital video, etc.)
nd like commercial sites that track visitors to develop consumer rofiles, terrorist organizations capture information about the sers who browse their websites.
The SITE Institute, a Washington, D.C.-based terrorism esearch group that monitors al-Qaeda's Internet communications, as provided chilling details of a high-tech recruitment drive aunched in 2003 to recruit fighters to travel to Iraq and attack U.S. nd coalition forces there.
The Internet also grants terrorists a heap and efficient means of networking.
Many terrorist groups, mong them Hamas and al-Qaeda, have undergone a transforma ion from strictly hierarchical organizations with designated lead rs to affiliations of semi-independent cells that have no single ommanding hierarchy.
Through the Internet, these loosely inter onnected groups are able to maintain contact with one an therand with members of other terrorist groups.
The Internet onnects not only members of the same terrorist organizations ut also members of different groups.
For instance, dozens of ites supporting terrorism in the name of jihad permit terrorists n places as far removed from one another as Chechnya and alaysia to exchange ideas and practical information about how o build bombs, establish terror cells, and carry out attacks .
l-Qaeda operatives relied heavily on the Internet in planning nd coordinating the September 11 attacks.
On the ther hand, there may be nothing more dangerous today than a failed  H E W O R L D IS F L A T tate with broadband capability.
That is, even failed states tend to have elecommunications systems and satellite links, and therefore if a terror st group infiltrates a failed state, as al-Qaeda did with Afghanistan, it can mplify its power enormously.
Think of America in Afghanistan and Iraq, Russia in hechnya, Australia in East Timor.
"The Chinese Communists had to hide in caves n northwest China, but they could move around in whatever territory hey were able to control.
Bin Laden, by contrast, can't show his face, but e can reach every household in the world, thanks to the Internet."
ell hath no fury like a terrorist with a satellite dish and an interac ive Web site.
oo ERSONALLY NSECURE   the fall of 2004,1 was invited to speak at a synagogue in Woodstock, ew York, not far from Yasgur's farm, home of the famous Woodstock usic festival.
And since the Dell Theory offers no hope of re training the suicide supply chains, the only strategy we have is to limit heir worst capabilities.
Harvard University nternational affairs expert Graham Allison, in his book Nuclear Terrorism: he Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe, oudines just such a strategy for enying terrorists access to nuclear weapons and nuclear materials.
"Russia doesn't ose treasures from the Kremlin armory.
Finally, no new nuclear states eans "drawing a line under the current eight nuclear powers and de ermining that, however unfair and unreasonable it may be, that club ill have no more members than those eight," says Allison, adding that hese three steps might then buy us time to develop a more formal, sus ainable, internationally approved regime.
t would be nice also to be able to deny the Internet to al-Qaeda and ts ilk, but that, alas, is impossiblewithout undermining ourselves.
If we are not going o shut down the Internet and all the other creative and collaborative ools that have flattened the world, and if we can't restrict access to them, he only thing we can do is try to influence the imagination and inten ions that people bring to them and draw from them.
Now, all these years later, umankind has again created a new platform for more people from ore places to communicate and collaborate with less friction and more ase than ever: the Internet.
Would God see the Internet as heresy?
It was so simple, really: In July 1989, undreds of East Germans sought refuge at the West German embassy n Hungary.
In September 1989, Hungary decided to remove its border estrictions with Austria.
That meant that any East German who got into ungary could pass through to Austria and the free world.
Sure enough,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ore than thirteen thousand East Germans escaped through Hungary's ack door.
omeone there in Hungary, maybe it was the prime minister, maybe it as just a bureaucrat, must have said to himself or herself, "Imagine magine what might happen if we opened the border with Austria."
He assembled $130 illion in venture capital, bought a fleet of Airbus A-320 passenger jets, ecruited pilots and signed them to seven-year contracts, and outsourced is reservation system to stay-at-home moms and retirees living around alt Lake City, Utah, who booked passengers on their home computers.
At a meeting in andahar, Afghanistan, in March or April 1999, he accepted a proposal nitially drawn up by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the Pakistan-born me hanical engineer who was the architect of the 9/11 plot.
aybe it was because I read the 9/11 report while on a trip to Silicon alley that I could not help but notice how much Khalid Sheikh ohammed spoke and presented himself as just another eager engineerentrepreneur, with his degree from North Carolina Agricultural and echnical State University, pitching his ideas to Osama bin Laden, who omes off as just another wealthy venture capitalist.
But Mohammed, las, was looking for adventure capital.
As the 9/11 Commission Report ut it, "No one exemplifies the model of the terrorist entrepreneur more learly than Khalid Sheikh Mohammed (KSM), the principal architect f the 9/11 attacks.
Highly educated and equally comfortable in a overnment office or a terrorist safe house, KSM applied his imagina ion, technical aptitude and managerial skills to hatching and planning n extraordinary array of terrorist schemes.
These ideas included con entional car bombing, political assassination, aircraft bombing, hijack ng, reservoir poisoning, and, ultimately, the use of aircraft as missiles uided by suicide operatives... KSM presents himself as an entrepre eur seeking venture capital and people .
Bin Laden summoned SM to Kandahar in March or April 1999 to tell him that al-Qaeda ould support his proposal.
Bin Laden recruited from the al-Qaeda roster just the right mus le guys from Asir Province, in Saudi Arabia, just the right pilots from urope, just the right team leader from Hamburg, and just the right sup ort staff from Pakistan.
Bin Laden, who knew he needed only to "lease" the Boeing 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 57s, 767s, A320s, and possibly 747s for his operation, raised the neces ary capital for training pilots on all these different aircraft from a syndi ate of pro-al-Qaeda Islamic charities and other Muslim adventure apitalists ready to fund anti-American operations.
Once the team was assembled, in Laden focused on his own core competencyoverall leadership and deological inspiration of his suicide supply chain, with assistance from is deputies Mohammed Atef and Ayman al-Zawahiri.
ou can get the full flavor of the bin Laden supply chain, and what an ggressive adopter of new technology al-Qaeda was, by reading just one ntry from the December 2001 U.S. District Court for the Eastern istrict of Virginia's official indictment of Zacarias Moussaoui, the socalled nineteenth hijacker from 9/11.
It then points out that throughout the year 2000, ll of the hijackers, including Moussaoui, began either attending or in uiring about flight school courses in America: "On or about September 9, 2000, Zacarias Moussaoui contacted Airman Flight School in orman, Oklahoma, using an e-mail account he set up on September 6 ith an Internet service provider in Malaysia.
In or about October 2000, acarias Moussaoui received letters from Infocus Tech, a Malaysian com any, stating that Moussaoui was appointed Infocus Tech's marketing onsultant in the United States, the United Kingdom and Europe, and hat he would receive, among other things, an allowance of $2,500 per onth .
On or about December 11,2000, Mohammed Atta purchased light deck videos for the Boeing 767 Model 300ER and the Airbus A320 odel 200 from the Ohio Pilot S t o r e .
In or about June 2001, in orman, Oklahoma, Zacarias Moussaoui made inquiries about starting a ropdusting company... On or about August 16, 2001, Zacarias oussaoui possessed, among other things: two knives; a pair of binocu ars; flight manuals for the Boeing 747 Model 400; a flight simulator com uter program; fighting gloves and shin guards; a piece of paper referring o a handheld Global Positioning System receiver and a camcorder; soft are that could be used to review pilot procedures for the Boeing 747  H E W O R L D IS F L A T odel 400; letters indicating that Moussaoui is a marketing consultant in he United States for Infocus Tech; a computer disk containing informa ion related to the aerial application of pesticides; and a hand-held avia ion radio."
From the primordial swamps of globalization have emerged two ge etic variants," observed Infosys C E O Nandan Nilekanione is alQaeda and the other are companies like Infosys or JetBlue.
I argued right after 9/11 hat the reason our intelligence did not pick up the 9/11 plotters was "a ailure of imagination."
Let's eally make a splash and go after it."
Both andace's mother and colleagues described her to The New York Times s a young woman full of energy and ambition, who loved her intern hip.
Indeed, Candace's colleagues at Merrill Lynch liked her so much hey took her to dinner on her last day of work, sent her home in a lim usine, and later wrote Northeastern to say, "Send us five more like andace."
A few weeks after finishing midterm examsshe was on a une-December academic scheduleCandace Lee Williams decided o meet her roommate at her home in California.
nfortunately, Candace took the American Airlines Flight 11 that de arted from Boston's Logan Airport on the morning of September 11, 001, at 8:02 a.m.
But the fact is, the chances of our plane being hi acked by terrorists today are still infinitesimal.
alysts have always tended to measure a society by classical economic and social statistics: its deficit-to-GDP ratio, or its unemployment rate, or the rate of literacy among its adult women.
They see dignity, affirma ion, and self-worth not by mining the present but by chewing on the ast.
I think my friend David othkopf, a former Commerce Department official and now a fellow t the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said it best: "The nswer for us lies not in what has changed, but in recognizing what has ot changed.
Because only through this recognition will we begin to fo us on the truly critical issuesan effective multilateral response to eapons of mass destruction proliferation, the creation of real stakehold rs in globalization among the world's poor, the need for reform in the rab world, and a style of U.S. leadership that seeks to build our base of upport worldwide by getting more people to voluntarily sign onto our alues.
He used hose 9/11 emotions to take a far-right Republican domestic agenda on axes, the environment, and social issues from 9/10an agenda for hich he had no popular mandateand drive it into a 9/12 world.
His administration transformed the United  H E W O R L D IS F L A T tates into "the United States of Fighting Terrorism."
e need our president to restore September 11 to its rightful place on he calendaras the day after September 10 and before September 12. e must never let it become a day that defines us.
People don't sually write Wal-Mart managers to compliment them on a fabulous urchase.
hitman recalled that one day she got an e-mail from a couple in rlando who were coming to an "eBay Live" event at which she was peaking.
hey asked if they could come backstage to meet Whitman after her peech.
"So after the keynote," she recalled, "they come back to my reen room, and in comes mom and dad and a seventeen-year-old boy in  wheelchairvery disabled with cerebral palsy.
The largest uslim country in the world is Indonesia and the second largest is not audi Arabia, Iran, Egypt, or Pakistan.
It is India.
With some 150 million uslims, India has more Muslims than Pakistan.
But here is an interest ng statistic from 9/11: There are no Indian Muslims that we know of in l-Qaeda and there are no Indian Muslims in America's Guantnamo ay post-9/11 prison camp.
And no Indian Muslims have been found ighting alongside the jihadists in Iraq.
Why do we not read bout Indian Muslims, who are a minority in a vast Hindu-dominated and, blaming America for all their problems and wanting to fly airplanes nto the Taj Mahal or the British embassy?
Lord knows, Indian Muslims ave their grievances about access to capital and political representation.
nd interreligious violence has occasionally flared up in India, with dis strous consequences.
I am certain that out of 150 million Muslims in ndia, a few will one day find their way to al-Qaedaif it can happen ith some American Muslims, it can happen with Indian Muslims.
he answer is contextand in particular the secular, free-market, emocratic context of India, heavily influenced by a tradition of nonvio- 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 ence and Hindu tolerance.
M. J. Akbar, the Muslim editor of the Asian ge, a national Indian English-language daily primarily funded by nonMuslim Indians, put it to me this way: "I'll give you a quiz question: Which s the only large Muslim community to enjoy sustained democracy for the ast fifty years?
The Muslims of India.
I am not going to exaggerate Muslim ood fortune in India.
But the fact is, the Indian Constitution is secular and rovides a real opportunity for economic advancement of any community hat can offer talent.
That's why a growing Muslim middle class here is oving up and generally doesn't manifest the strands of deep anger you ind in many nondemocratic Muslim states."
here Islam is embedded in authoritarian societies, it tends to be ome the vehicle of angry protestEgypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan.
ut where Islam is embedded in a pluralistic democratic societyTurkey or India, for instance those with a more progressive outlook ave a chance to get a better hearing for their interpretation and a dem cratic forum where they can fight for their ideas on a more equal foot ng.
Second, the prime minis er of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who comes from an Islamic party, aid a visit to the chief rabbi in his officethe first time a Turkish prime inister had ever called on the chief rabbi.
Lastly, the father of one of the uicide bombers told the Turkish newspaper Zaman, "We cannot under tand why this child had done the thing he had done .
am keenly aware of the imperfections of Indian democracy, starting  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ith the oppressive caste system.
Two f India's presidents have been Muslims, and its current president, A.P.J.
bdul Kalam, is both a Muslim and the father of the Indian nuclear mis ile program.
While a Muslim woman sits on India's Supreme Court, no uslim woman is allowed even to drive a car in Saudi Arabia.
Indian uslims, including women, have been governors of many Indian states, nd the wealthiest man in India today, high on the Forbes list of global illionaires, is an Indian Muslim: Azim Premji, the chairman of Wipro, ne of India's most important technology companies.
I was in India hortly after the United States invaded Afghanistan in late 2001, when ndian television carried a debate between the country's leading female ovie star and parliamentarian Shabana Azmi, a Muslim woman  nd the imam of New Delhi's biggest mosque.
The imam had called on ndian Muslims to go to Afghanistan and join the jihad against America, nd Azmi ripped into him, live on Indian TV, basically telling the cleric o go take a hike.
She told him to go to Kandahar and join the Taliban nd leave the rest of India's Muslims alone.
South Asian Muslim friend of mine once told me this story: His ndian Muslim family split in 1948, with half going to Pakistan and half 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 taying in Mumbai.
When he got older, he asked his father one day why he Indian half of the family seemed to be doing better than the Pakistani alf.
His father said to him, "Son, when a Muslim grows up in India and e sees a man living in a big mansion high on a hill, he says, 'Father, one ay, I will be that man.'
And when a Muslim grows up in Pakistan and ees a man living in a big mansion high on a hill, he says, 'Father, one ay I will kill that man.'"
Atul Vashistha, C E O of the outsourcing onsulting firm NeoIT, often appears in the American media to defend utsourcing.
So after he is helping me for about ten or fifteen minutes he ays, 'Sir, do you mind if I say something to you?'
I ad just been on a VOA show about the backlash against globalization nd outsourcing.
I defended outsourcing and this guy eard it."
An Indian help-line operator suddenly knows, in real ime, all about how one of his compatriots is representing India half a orld away, and it makes him feel better about himself.
he French Revolution, the American Revolution, the Indian democ-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T acy, and even eBay are all based on social contracts whose dominant fea ure is that authority comes from the bottom up, and people can and do eel self-empowered to improve their lot.
HE  URSE F O I L thing has contributed more to retarding the emergence of a demo ratic context in places like Venezuela, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, and ran than the curse of oil.
As long as the monarchs and dictators who run hese oil states can get rich by drilling their natural resourcesas opposed o drilling the natural talents and energy of their peoplethey can stay in ffice forever.
Countries focused on apping their people have to focus on developing real institutions, prop rty rights, rule of law, independent courts, modern education, foreign rade, foreign investment, freedom of thought, and scientific inquiry to et the most out of their men and women.
In an essay in Foreign Affairs alled "Saving Iraq from Its Oil" (July-August 2004), development econ mists Nancy Birdsall and Arvind Subramanian point out that "34 lessdeveloped countries now boast significant oil and natural gas resources hat constitute at least 30 percent of their total export revenue.
As I noted earlier, Bahrain was one of the first Arab ulf states to discover oil and was the first Arab Gulf state to run out of oil.
nd today it is thefirstArab Gulf state to develop comprehensive labor re orm for developing the skills of its own workers, the first to sign a freetrade agreement with the United States, and thefirstto hold a free and fair lection, in which women could both run and vote.
t is worthy of note that Jordan began upgrading its education system nd privatizing, modernizing, and deregulating its economy starting in 989precisely when oil prices were way down and it could no longer ely on handouts from the Gulf oil states.
In 1999, when Jordan signed ts free-trade agreement with the United States, its exports to America to aled $13 million.
In 2004, Jordan exported over $1 billion of goods to mericathings Jordanians made with their hands.
The Jordanian gov rnment has also installed computers and broadband Internet in every chool.
Most important, in 2004, Jordan announced a reform of its edu ation requirements for mosque prayer leaders.
Traditionally, high school tudents in Jordan took an exam for college entrance, and those who did he best became doctors and engineers.
In 2004, Jordan decided to gradually phase in a new  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ystem.
That is an important change in context that should pay dividends ver time in the narratives that young Jordanians are nurtured upon in heir mosques.
"We had to go through a crisis to accept the need for re orm," said Jordan's minister of planning, Bassem Awadallah.
The most open, tolerant cities in the Muslim orld today are its trading centers Beirut, Istanbul, Jakarta, Dubai, ahrain.
The most open, tolerant cities in China are Hong Kong and hanghai.
The most closed cities in the world are in central Saudi rabia, where no Christians, Hindus, Jews, or other non-Muslims are al owed to express their religions in public or build a house of worship, nd, in the case of Mecca, even enter.
As I pointed out earlier, there is only one Arab company that devel ped a world-class business strong enough to get itself listed on the asdaq, and that was Aramex.
Every Jordanian, every Arab, should know nd take pride in the Aramex story, the way every American knows the pple and Microsoft and Dell stories.
hen Fadi Ghandour took Aramex public again in 2005, this time in ubai, some four hundred Aramex employees from all over the Arab orld who had stock options divided $14 million.
ust as it is no accident that there are no Indian Muslims in al-Qaeda, it s no accident that the three thousand Arab employees of Aramex want o deliver only packages that help economies grow and Arab people lourish not suicide bombs.
peaking of the Aramex employees with stock options, Ghandour aid, "They all feel like owners.
ive me just one hundred more examples like Aramex, and I will tart to give you a different contextand narrative.
It was a young Indian woman who said he was attending a private journalism school on the outskirts of the city nd wanted to know if I would come by and meet with her class.
I was met t the door by a handsome middle-aged Indian man named Abraham eorge.
Born in Kerala, George served in the Indian Army, while his other immigrated to the United States and went to work for NASA.
eorge followed her, went on to study at NYU, started a software firm hat specialized in international finance, sold it in 1998, and decided to 1/9 V E R S U S 9/1 1 ome back to India and use his American-made fortune to try to change ndia from the bottomthe absolute bottom up.
ne thing George learned from his time in the United States was hat without more responsible Indian newspapers and journalists, the ountry could never improve its governance.
As we sat in his office sipping juice, it quickly became apparent o me, though, that as proud as he was of his little journalism school, he as even more proud of the elementary school he had started in a village utside Bangalore populated by India's lowest caste, the untouchables, ho are not supposed to even get near Indians of a higher caste for fear hat they will pollute the very air they breathe.
George wanted to prove hat if you gave these untouchable children access to the same tech ologies and solid education that have enabled other pockets of India to lug in and play with the flat world, they could do the same.
The first classroom we walked into had wenty untouchable kids at computers working on Excel and Microsoft ord.
Next door, another class was practicing typing on a computer typ ng program.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T he selection process to get into Shanti Bhavan is based on whether  child is below the poverty line and the parents are willing to send him r her to a boarding school.
"We are giving them English ducation so they can go anywhere in India and anywhere in the world or higher education," said Law.
ut if they go somewhere else, and if they are really polished, with proper ducation and social graces, they can break this barrier."
fter listening to George, my mind drifted back to only four months arlier, in the fall of 2003, when I had been in the West Bank filming nother documentary about the Arab-Israeli conflict.
hen I asked one of the three, Mohammed Motev, what was the worst hing about living in the context of Israeli occupation, he said the check oints.
They warned me that if Israel tried to kill Yasser Arafat, who as then still alive (and was a leader who knew how to stimulate only 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 emories, not dreams), they would turn the whole area into a living hell."
Unfortunately, he said, he could not get a visa into he United States now.
hese were good young men, not terrorists.
These were eight-year-old Indian kids hose parents were untouchables.
My own daughter went off to college n the fall of 2004, and my wife and I dropped her off on a warm eptember day.
o put it another way, the greatest dangers we Americans face are an xcess of protectionism excessive fears of another 9/11 that prompt us o wall ourselves in, in search of personal securityand excessive fears of ompeting in a world of 11/9 that prompt us to wall ourselves off, in earch of economic security.
If it is to be for better, not for worse, then you and your gener tion must not live in fear of either the terrorists or tomorrow, of either alQaeda or Infosys.
