Berkshire's most important business is insurance, carried on principally through its 100% owned subsidiary, GEICO Corporation, the seventh largest auto insurer in the United States.
Berkshire publishes The Buffalo News and owns other businesses that manufacture or distribute products ranging from encyclopedias, home furnishings, and cleaning systems, to chocolate candies, ice cream, footwear, uniforms, and air compressors.
Berkshire also owns substantial equity interests in major corporations, including American Express, Coca-Cola, Walt Disney, Freddie Mac, Gillette, McDonald's, The Washington Post, and Wells Fargo.
For an extreme but not atypical example, consider Al Dunlap's aggressive plan to turn around ailing Sunbeam.
Linking life's two certainties, the final essay includes one of Buffett's many jokes about his personal longevity: if enjoying life promotes longevity, he is jeopardizing Methuselah's record (969 years).
This case, examples of which are Hershey Foods and Dow Jones, puts the outside directors in a potentially useful position.
We also made a major acquisition, Waumbec Mills, with the expectation of important synergy (a term widely used in business to explain an acquisition that otherwise makes no sense).
For an understanding of how the to-invest-or-not-to-invest dilemma plays out in a commodity business, it is instructive to look at Burlington Industries, by far the largest U.S. textile company both 21 years ago and now.
Accordingly, prior to our purchase, I was forced into my Galileo mode.
For example, we compensate Ralph Schey based upon the results of Scott Fetzer rather than those of Berkshire.
He could, for example, be hitting home runs at Scott Fetzer while Charlie and I rang up mistakes at Berkshire, thereby negating his efforts many times over.
Conversely, why should option profits or bonuses be heaped upon Ralph if good things are occurring in other parts of Berkshire but Scott Fetzer is lagging?
The product of this money's-not-free approach is definitely visible at Scott Fetzer.
I can't resist mentioning that our compensation arrangement with Ralph Schey was worked out in about five minutes, immediately upon our purchase of Scott Fetzer and without the "help" of lawyers or compensation consultants.
CORPORATE FINANCE AND INVESTING We bought all of our [Washington Post Company ("WPC")] holdings in mid~1973 at a price of not more than one-fourth of the then per-share business value of the enterprise.
Arcata Corp., one of our more serendipitous arbitrage experiences, illustrates the twists and turns of the business.
On September 28, 1981 the directors of Arcata agreed in principle to sell the company to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. (KKR), then and now a major leveraged-buyout firm.
At yearend, our only major arbitrage position was 3,342,000 shares of RJR Nabisco with a cost of $281.8 million and a market value of $304.5 million.
In my opinion, the continuous 63-year arbitrage experience of Graham-Newman Corp., Buffett Partnership, and Berkshire illustrates just how foolish EMT is.
Leaving aside chewing gum, in which Wrigley is dominant, I know of no other significant businesses in which the leading company has long enjoyed such global power.
We should note that we expect to keep permanently our three primary holdings, Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., GEICO Corporation, and The Washington Post.
Leadership alone provides no certainties: Witness the shocks some years back at General Motors, IBM and Sears, all of which had enjoyed long periods of seeming invincibility.
Shortly after purchasing Berkshire, I acquired a Baltimore department store, Hochschild, Kohn, buying through a company called Diversified Retailing that later merged with Berkshire.
In other instances, a great investment opportunity occurs when a marvelous business encounters a one-time huge, but solvable, problem as was the case many years back at both American Express and GEIeO.
Second, both managerial 24 [Divided by hash lines: 1990; 1990 Wesco Financial Corporation Letter to Shareholders, by Charles T. Munger.
* * * * * Our other major portfolio change last year was large additions to our holdings of RJR Nabisco bonds, securities that we first bought in late 1989.
In the case of RJR Nabisco, we feel the Company's credit is considerably better than was generally perceived for a while and that the yield we receive, as well as the potential for capital gain, more than compensates for the risk we incur (though that is far from nil).
John Gutfreund at Salomon, Colman Mockler, Jr. at Gillette, Ed Colodny at USAir, and Andy Sigler at Champion meet this test in spades.
Top honors go to a mistake I made five years ago that fully ripened in 1994: Our $358 million purchase of USAir preferred stock, on which the dividend was suspended in September.
The day of reckoning for these airlines could be delayed by infusions of capital (such as ours into USAir), but eventually a fundamental rule of economics prevailed: In an unregulated commodity business, a company must lower its costs to competitive levels or face extinction.
Seth Schofield, [then] CEO of USAir, has worked diligently to correct the company's historical cost problems but, to date, has not managed to do so.
(As Herb Kelleher, CEO of Southwest Airlines, has said: "Bankruptcy court for airlines has become a health spa.")
Despite this difficult situation, USAir may yet achieve the cost reductions it needs to maintain its viability long-term.
Accordingly, we wrote our USAir investment down to $89.5 million, or 25 on the dollar, at yearend 1994.
1997] THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT The accounting effects of our USAir writedown are complicated.
Therefore, at the end of last year's third quarter, we were carrying our USAir preferred at $89.5 million, or 25% of cost.
In other words, our net worth was at that time reflecting a value for USAir that was far below our $358 million cost.
Charlie and I will not stand for reelection to USAir's board at the upcoming annual meeting.
Unwilling to accept Branson's proposition on faith, your Chairman decided in 1989 to test it by investing $358 million in a 91/4% preferred stock of USAir.
But my analysis of USAir's business was both superficial and wrong.
I was so beguiled by the company's long history of profitable operations, and by the protection that ownership of a senior security seemingly offered me, that I overlooked the crucial point: USAir's revenues would increasingly feel the effects of an unregulated, fiercely competitive market whereas its cost structure was a holdover from the days when regulation protected profits.
To rationalize its costs, however, USAir needed major improvements in its labor contracts-and that's something most airlines have found it extraordinarily difficult to get, short of credibly threatening, or actually entering, bankruptcy.
USAir was to be no exception.
Mixed in with my many mistakes at USAir was one thing I got right: Making our investment, we wrote into the preferred contract a somewhat unusual provision stipulating that "penalty dividends"-to run five percentage points over the prime rate-would be accrued on any arrearages.
Facing this penalty provision, USAir had every incentive to pay arrearages just as promptly as it could.
And in the second half of 1996, when USAir turned profitable, it indeed began to pay, giving us $47.9 million.
Even so, USAir's performance has recently been helped significantly by an industry tailwind that may be cyclical in nature.
In any event, the prices of USAir's publicly-traded securities tell us that our preferred stock is now probably worth its par value of $358 million, give or take a little.
After reviewing my sorry performance with USAir, you may conclude he had a point.
We continue to hold the convertible preferred stocks described in earlier reports: $700 million of Salomon Inc., $600 million of The Gillette Company, $358 million of USAir Group, Inc., and $300 million of Champion International Corp. Our Gillette holdings will be converted into 12 million shares of common stock on April 1.
Weighing interest rates, credit quality and prices of the related common stocks, we can assess our holdings in Salomon and 1997] THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT Champion at yearend 1990 as worth about what we paid, Gillette as worth somewhat more, and USAir as worth substantially less.
In making the USAir purchase, your Chairman displayed exquisite timing: I plunged into the business at almost the exact moment that it ran into severe problems.
The company's troubles were brought on both by industry conditions and by the post-merger difficulties it encountered in integrating Piedmont, an affliction I should have expected since almost all airline mergers have been followed by operational turmoil.
However, unless the industry is decimated during the next few years, our USAir investment should work out all right.
Our $300 million private purchase of American Express "Peres" .
Our First Empire preferred [was to] be called on March 31, 1996, the earliest date allowable.
We are comfortable owning stock in well-run banks, and we will convert and keep our First Empire common shares.
(This retention-no-matter-how-unattractive-the-return situation was communicated unwittingly in a marvelously ironic way by Consolidated Edison a decade ago.
If 100-million-share days persist for a year and the average cost on each purchase and sale is 1S a share, the chair-changing tax for investors in aggregate would total about $7.5 billion-an amount roughly equal to the combined 1982 profits of Exxon, General Motors, Mobil and Texaco, the four largest companies in the Fortune 500.
Consequently, they are certain their managerial kiss will do wonders for the profitability of Company T(arget).
Such optimism is essentiaL Absent that rosy view, why else should the shareholders of Company A(cquisitor) want to own an interest in T at the 2X takeover cost rather than at the X market price they would pay if they made direct purchases on their own?
The one other significant issuance of shares by Berkshire or its affiliated companies that occurred during present management's tenure was in the 1978 merger of Berkshire with Diversified Retailing Company.
The Dart Industries-Kraft and Nabisco-Standard Brands mergers appeared to be of this type, but they are the exceptions.
If Company A announces that it will issue shares to merge with Company B, the process is customarily described as "Company A to Acquire Company B", or "B Sells to A".
Assume Investment Company X, selling at 50% of asset value, wishes to merge with Investment Company Y.
Assume, also, that Company X therefore decides to issue shares equal in market value to 100% of Y's asset value.
When, in a typical LBO, the typical mostly equity corporate capitalization was replaced by 90% debt plus a new lO%-of-capitalization common stock position: (1) the combined market value of all the new common stock plus all the new debt became much higher than the previous market value of all the older common stock, because the existing stream of pre-tax earnings was no longer shared with corporate income tax collectors who, in many cases, had previously received more cash each year than shareholders; and (2) even after the value-enhancing effect of the corporate tax reduction was shared with former shareholders by paying them extra-high prices to leave, a retained residue of value-enhancing tax effect made the new common stock 40 [1989 Wesco Financial Corporation Letter to Shareholders, by Charles T. Munger.
"42 Besides being interested in the purchase of businesses as described above, we are also interested in the negotiated purchase of large, but not controlling, blocks of stock comparable to those we hold in Capital Cities, Salomon, Gillette, USAir, Champion, and American Express.
The Company's large earnings and strong cash position will permit the payment of a liberal dividend which, in turn, will result in the exercise of these option warrants immediately after issuance which, in turn, will further improve the cash position which, in turn, will permit a higher dividend rate-and so on, indefinitely.
As Reported Gross Receipts from all Sources (Including Inter Company) Salaries and Wages Other Operating Expenses and Taxes DepreciatIon Interest Discount on Bonds Retired Preferred Dividends Balance for Common Average Shares Outstanding Earned Per Share .
Blue Chip Stamps, 60% owned by Berkshire Hathaway Inc., falls into this category.
1997] THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT Blue Chip Stamps bought See's early in 1972 for $25 million, at which time See's had about $8 million of net tangible assets.
[Divided by hash lines: 1986; 1986 Appendix] 1997] THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT Company 0 Company N (OOOs Omitted) Revenues .
As you've probably guessed, Companies 0 and N are the same business-Scott Fetzer.
In the "0" (for "old") column we have shown what the company's 1986 GAAP earnings would have been if we had not purchased it; in the "N" (for "new") column we have shown Scott Fetzer's GAAP earnings as actually reported by Berkshire.
The contrast between 0 and N comes about because we paid an amount for Scott Fetzer that was different from its stated net worth.
In Scott Fetzer's case, we paid $315 million for net assets that were CARDOZO LAW REVIEW [Vol.
Because of a $22.9 million LIFO reserve and other accounting intricacies,s1 Scott Fetzer's inventory account was carried at a $37.3 million discount from current value.
1997] THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT Company 0 Company N (OOOs Omitted) Assets Cash and Cash Equivalents .
$4,979,000 for non-cash inventory costs resulting, primarily, from reductions that Scott Fetzer made in its inventories during 1986; charges of this kind are apt to be small or non-existent in future years.
52 The "new" Scott Fetzer pays exactly the same tax as the "old" Scott Fetzer would have, even though the GAAP earnings of the two entities differ greatly.
However, in the unlikely event that Scott Fetzer sells one of its businesses, the tax consequences to the "old" and "new" company might differ widely.
By the end of 1986 the difference between the net worth of the "old" and "new" Scott Fetzer had been reduced from $142.6 million to $131.0 million by means of the extra $11.6 million that was charged to earnings of the new entity.
Should investors pay more for the stock of Company 0 than of Company N?
And, if a business is worth some given multiple of earnings, was Scott Fetzer worth considerably more the day before we bought it than it was worth the following day?
These represent (a) reported earnings plus (b) depreciation, depletion, amortization, and certain other non-cash charges such as Company N's items (1) and (4) less (c) the average annual amount of capitalized expenditures for plant and equipment, etc.
The approach we have outlined produces "owner earnings" for Company 0 and Company N that are identical, which means valuations are also identical, just as common sense would tell you should be the case.
And what do Charlie and I, as owners and managers, believe is the correct figure for the owner earnings of Scott Fetzer?
In other words, we feel owner earnings of Scott Fetzer are considerably larger than the GAAP figures that we report.
* * * * * To sum up: in the case of both Scott Fetzer and our other businesses, we feel that (b) on an historical-cost basis-i.e., with both amortization of intangibles and other purchase-price adjustments excluded-is quite close in amount to (c).
In the past, Mutual Savings and Loan, and Scott Fetzer Financial (a credit company that primarily finances installment sales of World Book and Kirby products) were consolidated on a "one-line" basis.
This change obviously affects us positively-and it also has a significant positive effect on two of our three major investees, Capital Cities/ABC and The Washington Post Company.
Through my favorite comic strip, Li'l Abner, I got a chance during my youth to see the benefits of delayed taxes, though I missed the lesson at the time.
Making his readers feel superior, Li'l Abner bungled happily, but moronically, through life in Dogpatch.
I love running Berkshire, and if enjoying life promotes longevity, Methuselah's record is in jeopardy.62 [According to the Bible, Methuselah lived 969 years.
I am equally indebted to Charlie Munger, not only for his service as a panel-master and participant throughout the symposium, but also for allowing me to reprint in this collection portions of his Chairman's letters to the shareholders of Berkshire's Wesco Financial Corporation.
