Goals | Introduction Goals Language surrounds us from when we are infants, language is the predominant mode of expression at school and university, and now that we are adults, new languages are everywhere.
The subtitle of the present guide, Fast Language Learning, may be subject to misunderstanding.
Again, you will find nothing of all this in The Word Brain.
When we later summarise how to rapidly achieve reading and comprehension skills, I will prescribe you months of lonely learning sessions with books and audio files.
Learn a difficult language: Arabic.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Later in life, I took to the habit of learning languages by myself: Spanish in the early twenties, Italian after emigrating to Sardinia at the age of 27, Portuguese at 33 during a three-month trip to Brazil.
The Word Brain is not about counting (I, too, know Arabic.
The Word Brain is about the effort adults need to undertake to speak and understand another language.
I define speaking another language extensively.
The definition includes the ability Web: TheWordBrain.com Goals     | to read essays or newspapers to understand TV news or documentary programmes to imagine the correct spelling of words while listening to TV news or documentaries to understand everyday conversation In other words, The Word Brain describes the steps to metamorphosize yourself from a perfect illiterate to a person who has fluent hearing and reading abilities in another language.
I have condensed The Word Brain as much as possible so that you can read it in a couple of hours.
If you have to learn another language in the future, you might find some useful hints about how to streamline your project and save time.
; you will discover some of your extraordinary reading abilities; learn how differently your brain processes spoken words and written words; see the need of sequencing speech in small slices; discover the extraordinary Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain accomplishments of your memory; and, finally, conceive a strategic plan to crack your next language as quickly and as reliably as possible.
Reading newspapers, understanding TV  the bar is high.
Lets start with the number of new words you have to feed into your brain.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | Words Words are the fuel of language and the number of words you are familiar with determines your language abilities.
This is a huge number and double what you are Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain expected to learn in 8 years at school.
In order to understand how many truly new words you will have to manage  words you have never seen before and which you cannot deduce from other languages you know  we need a short history of your linguistic abilities:  What is your native language?
Based on your answers, good teachers are able to make a reliable estimate of the number of words you must transfer into your brain.
Worstcase scenarios are languages that are completely different from any of the languages you know: for Europeans, typical examples are Hindi, Arabic, Japanese or Chinese.
Once your teachers define the word quota you have to burn into your brain, the next question is: how long will it take me to learn these words?
You may be surprised to know that the total study time for wiring a new word into livelong memory is around five minutes.
Children tend to have it easier because they have so-called fast-mapping abilities, a fabulous fast lane for word learning after a single exposure, which partly explains the prodigious rate at which they learn new words.
Learning is a biological process that requires new connections between brain cells, and these connections are being produced from a huge number of biochemical substances.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain At a conservative estimate of 10 words per hour, it will take you 500 hours to learn 5,000 words (French/Spanish) and 1,500 hours to learn 15,000 words (European/Arabic).
Based on the number of hours you are prepared to invest on a daily basis, your total study time can be predicted with fairly good accuracy.
Table 1.1: Study time (in months)* Number of words to learn 5,000 10,000 15,000 0.5 Hours/Day 1.5 * At five days per week; figures are rounded These numbers have important implications.
First, language learning means daily learning.
If you are not ready for daily practise, reconsider your project.
Second, language learning is mostly a do-it-yourself job.
Some of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain friends may get to the summit in 4 hours, others in 6 hours, but nobody will do it in 30 minutes.
In Chapter 7, you will find a number of strategies to cope with hundreds of words every month.
Total workload after Chapter 1 500  1,500 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | Listening Have you recently listened to people speaking unfamiliar languages?
You will soon notice that humans produce continuous streams of uninterrupted speech.
Delimitingwordboundariesinaspeechstreamisnoeasierthantryin gtodeterminetheminthepreviousparagraphsohowdoyounginfant scrackthesoundcodetheyperformfrequencyanalysestakeforexam plethesoundsequencewhataprettybabyyouarethroughcontinuous exposuretohumanlanguagebabblinghumansproduce10000wordsa ndmoreinasinglehourinfantsprogressivelyunderstandthatsyllabl eswhicharepartofthesamewordtendtofollowoneanotherpredicta blyprettybabywhereassyllablesthatfollowoneanotherlessfrequen tlyarewordboundariesaprettyba.
To see what it looks like when your auditory brain cortex works at full-speed, put your brain into a PET scanner (Figure 2.2).
This seems counterintuitive because in Arabic, I needed to learn at least three times as many words as in Italian.
Perhaps even relatively immune to the effect Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | of ageing?
And are young children truly superior to adults in word segmenting or do they simply dedicate more time to listening than adults?
Figure 2.2 Listening to words: High activity in the auditory brain cortex.
Even if your teachers teach exclusively in the foreign language, you will rarely total more than 500 hours of attentive listening in a typical 5-year course.
Thus, you discover that your teachers were innocent  they simply did not have enough time to get you through your speech segmentation task.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain So, if private and public schools are not in a position to provide us with sufficient exposure to human speech, where can we go to get it?
Add an intense love affair, and daily listening quotas of 8, 10, or even 12 hours will soon be a reality.
During the 100 hours of extra study just mentioned, listen to your audio sources.
In these cases, take single sentences or even single words, put them in an audio loop and listen to them 5, 10, or 15 times.
More importantly, dont feel uncomfortable if Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | you listen to your audio sources for the 54th time.
Insomnia, too, is an excellent moment for donning your earphones.
Once you have digested your first (and maybe second) language manual, you will discover that the Internet offers extraordinary tools for second-language acquisition: audio files plus transcripts.
Check www.Amedeo.net/s.php?s=4 for more websites with audio transcripts.
all this has little or no impact on your personal and Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain professional life, and watching TV is basically tantamount to killing precious life time.
To summarise: Human speech is a continuous sound stream.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening       | To ensure extensive exposure to human speech, emigrate or find surrogates for real life: 1) Language manuals + MP3s; 2) Internet audio sources + transcripts; 3) TV.
If you cannot emigrate, dissolve your training into your daily life by listening to audio files during cooking, commuting, doing sport, etc.
Unless you emigrate, speech recognition training is as lonely a task as word learning.
Workload after Chapter 12 Speech-recognition training, typically 1,500 hours and more, can mostly be integrated into daily activities.
Only about 100 hours of extra study time are needed as you become familiar with one or two language manuals.
Adding these 100 hours to the initial workload defined in Chapter 1 (500 to 1,500 hours for importing 5,000 to 15,000 words into your word brain; see page 20), your total workload is now 600 to 1,600 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | Reading Ocne uopn a tmie trhee lived in a cietarn vlagile a lttile cnortuy gril, the prettseit crteuare who was eevr seen.
If you are not, understanding the previous paragraph is more challenging, because your deciphering skill depends on the number of years you have been reading English.
Reading a book is like seeing a movie.
Reading only one hour every day exposes your brain to some 20,000 words, or 7 million words per year.
Well, if reading were like watching a movie, you would certainly have to absorb a huge number of new word-images  and as with listening, some segmentation is needed.
Remember the examples from the Words chapter (abracadabrantesque et al.) Reading is different from listening because training your reading skills comes as a bonus of the obligatory learning of the 5,000 to 15,000 words.
Decades of reading the Latin alphabet have conditioned your brain for high-speed deciphering of words from any language that uses this alphabet, even roadblocks such as leszllplya and megfigyelkpessg.
Exactly how familiar and how tremendously important the Latin alphabet is becomes evident if you complicate things a step further and select a language with equally unfamiliar words + a different alphabet + the irritating habit of skipping half of the vowels.
The result: Arabic.
In Arabic you will discover, much to your dismay, that you need to know the function of a word within a sentence  is it a noun?
Well, thats exactly how complicated reading and learning a language is when 50 percent of the Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain vowels are left to the beginners guesswork.
Anticipate one to three years of extra study time.
(Chinese is another example, but not Russian, as this modifies only some characters.)
Just to make sure that you are not left with any false delusions, add the following facts: a) written Arabic is spoken nowhere except on TV and at meetings or presentations; b) in order to speak everyday Arabic you have to learn additional country dialects which in practise amounts to learning another language (like learning Italian once you have learned Spanish); c) in Arabic-speaking countries, there is less opportunity to visit provinces and cities with the fascination and vibrations that inspire dreams of fabulous 6-month fullimmersion experiences typical in Tuscany, Dordogne, Seville, Berlin, Edinburgh, Freiburg, Orgosolo, Amsterdam, Stockholm, or Lisbon  and you swiftly realise that you need to have pretty good reasons to start learning Arabic.
Among the dozens of existing manuals, only a few are outstanding, and selecting good manuals is like crossing a minefield.
In particular, make sure that the manual has word lists and comes with audio files on a CD-ROM or on the internet.
As with audio files, be prepared for repetitive learning cycles.
You will soon find out that reading is easier than listening, because it does not require high-speed processing of several words per second; instead, while deciphering a text, you can take all the time you need until you understand everything  lingering on single words, going back and forth through a sentence, leaping between paragraphs.
Buy it soon and mark the pages that Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain correspond to the individual letters (see Figure 3.1).
Arabic dictionary, 2250 g. Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | Figure 3.2: Working with dictionaries, highlighting consulted words.
But... dont neglect the daily listening training prescribed in the previous chapter!
Eye-ear dissociation.
Inappropriate training of the auditory brain cortex (see the previous Listening chapter).
Training the visual brain areas at the back of the head (see Figure 3.3) has little Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain influence on the performance of the auditory brain areas.
In the Speaking chapter below, you will find yet another construction site.
Figure 3.3: Reading words: High activity in the visual brain cortex.
These skills are of no use for languages with different writing systems such as Arabic or Chinese.
After finishing your first language manuals, start reading articles or books that you would normally read in your native language.
The last three chapters  Words, Listening, Reading  may suggest that language learning can be done without teachers.
As Web: TheWordBrain.com Reading | a matter of fact, for the most time-intensive tasks, such as word learning and speech recognition, teachers are of little help.
Grammar is the collection of these rules.
Fortunately, the number of grammar rules is limited, and if you have some experience with grammar, you could also decide to go on your own.
For the present chapter, we just need to book 100 hours for the text study of one or two language manuals.
Your total workload is now 700 to 1,700 hours Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | Teachers Everyone agrees that there are good physicians and bad physicians.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | In order to get a clearer picture of language teaching and, consequently, of how to avoid bored and boring teachers, lets address a list of the services teachers should provide.
As we have seen in the Words chapter, vocabulary training is inherently a lonely job because nobody except yourself can transfer thousands of words into your brain.
As a consequence, audio CDs, audio books, internet news, and TV have supplanted teachers as prime speech sources.
Writing comes as a bonus of reading, reading as a bonus of word learning, and as you will see in the Speaking chapter, correct pronunciation comes as a bonus of hundreds of hours of listening.
Grammar is therefore the only domain where language teachers will continue to play a certain role in the future.
Grammar  the climax of excruciatingly boring language lessons, and a torture for teens?
Grammar consists of a fairly limited number of rules that tell you how to modify words and how to arrange them to form correct and beautiful sentences.
All we can press out of to want are two variations, wants and wanted.
Fortunately, there are strict rules which govern verbs (a discipline which grammarians call conjugation); and with the exception of some irregular verbs, all variations of a verb can be Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | easily deduced.
The same repetitive training as in word training: repeated exposure, and heavy nailing.
), and a limited number of pronouns (I, you, he, she, me, him, her, my, your, his; to name only a few);  the order in which to arrange the words in a sentence;  how to count and to ask questions;  how to localise things in time and space.
Your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain native language is by far the best tool for grasping and understanding new concepts.
As I had just developed a small piece of software on the mythical Commodore 64 (see the subsequent Internet release at www.Poliglottus.com), I was happy to test it on a complaisant guinea pig.
Depending on your previous exposure to your native and subsequent languages, your coach will prepare an individual time schedule for your project; recommend books, podcasts, audio books, and broadcasts; provide the first round of grammar; advise you on how to manage your daily word quota; teach you how to check that new Web: TheWordBrain.com Teachers | words have arrived in your long-term memory; and demonstrate common pronunciation pitfalls.
| The Word Brain Opt for the coach model and limit the number of lessons.
Learning, listening, reading  hundreds of hours, thousands of words.
Your total workload is now 800 to 1,800 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | Speaking The day you utter your first words in a new language is not always a happy day.
From what we saw in the Listening chapter, part of the solution was to postpone speech, and to just listen to the sounds of the world.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Anatomy and physiology conspired.
In fact, only at around the age of ten do they start speaking like adults (Figure 5.1).
Speaking skills have another disturbing characteristic: they are subject to heavy erosion.
Stop speaking a second language for a decade or more, and even simple words such as Goodbye are suddenly irretrievable.
At the same time, listening and reading skills are hardly impaired.
The speaking abilities, on the contrary, would need continuous stimulation to be maintained.
As a result of years of listening, the part of your word brain that processes sounds is better trained than the part that produces speech.
How would you value listening skills with respect to speaking skills?
In the Listening chapter, I recommended that you observe a few months of mystical silence.
Repeating the lessons of your language manuals will take you some weeks.
Thereafter, use the same procedure  listening to and reproducing speech with a onesecond interval  with sentences from other sources such as podcasts, audio books, or TV.
In the beginning, real-life speech Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | will be so fast that you will reproduce only fragments of sentences.
I suggested that you repeat the sentences of language manuals, TV, and audio books.
That is, of course, the end of the dream of speaking another language.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Speaking | With so much information to be crammed into your brain, you might wonder how memory works.
Workload after Chapter 15 Due to heavy exposure to human speech during your CD and/or TV training (see Chapter 2), once you start speaking, progress will be fast.
Your total workload is now 850 to 1,850 hours Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | Memory In your native language, your brain recognises  and endows with meaning  any conceivable subset of 50,000+ words within fractions of a second.
It does so because glass is woven into your brain in many different ways: you have a mental image of a glass; you Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain have a memory trace for the spoken word; you have a memory trace for the written word; you know that the word has 5 letters, that it starts with a g and ends with an s; you have a motor recipe for pronouncing the word; and, on demand, you can recall hundreds of memories associated with the word  glasses raised to celebrate births, marriages, and anniversaries, or a glass smashed against a wall.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | To manage word webs  and other tasks, of course  your brain relies on complex and compact machinery.
However, at Day 31, you might not perform much better than the memory pioneers more than 100 Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | years ago.
In order to protect young spines from erosion, schedule multiple training sessions.
At a subsequent stage, a word would be on the tip of your tongue, yet decline to come out.
Forgetting curve.
Adapted from Hermann Ebbinghaus, Memory: a contribution to experimental psychology, 1885/1913.
Memorys suspicious gatekeepers want convincing evidence that a word deserves residence in lifelong memory.
Learning curve (red), constructed from truncated forgetting curves.
Green: Repetition putting the retention rate back to 100 percent.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Memory | Figure 6.4 illustrates these spaced repetitions and where they will take you.
Lets say nailing.
The pre-existing webs of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain word brain are a unique support for nailing new words.
Table 6.1 Example of a word list for Germans wanting to nail Italian words Italian German amare lieben la pace der Frieden odiare hassen la corruzione die Korruption la morte der Tod il cavaliere der Reiter la gioia die Freude la gente die Leute *** The nailing curve in Figure 6.4 is an approximation, because memory performance varies between individuals.
Every human brain is as unique as a human face, and differences in brain structure due to genetic variation, intrauterine conditions (exposure to tobacco, drugs, and alcohol), or environmental factors after birth, can affect learning abilities.
Stupidly, memory performance declines too, first imperceptibly, and after 50, undeniably.
Acute Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain alcohol intoxication (black-out) is fatal for memory, not to mention chronic abuse (alcohol dementia).
Alcohol, though, is a minor problem compared to a more widespread abuse: distraction.
If you repeatedly subtract a single-digit number from a larger number directly after one of your nailing sessions, you will see that your memory is impaired for the 3 to 5 most recently nailed words.
Opening social network accounts, reading incoherent information from disparate sources, writing short messages, participating in nonsense quizzes, listening simultaneously to music, downloading videos or doing whatever else you can imagine  such acrobatic multitasking is heavy stuff for delicate infant spines.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Lets summarise: 1.
Nailing is about strategies to cope with the huge number of words you have to burn into your brain.
Workload after Chapter 16 Your total workload is still 850 to 1,850 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Nailing | Nailing You are now ready for take off.
The sheer volume of this task  500 to 1,500 hours  may surprise those who had a nave or romantic perception of speaking other peoples tongues.
If you are learning just for fun and want to limit daily learning to one hour a day, avoid languages with heavy word loads.
For people from Western Europe these are, for example, Russian, Turkish, Arabic, Chinese, or other African and Asian languages.
Every language is within your reach because your daily work schedule includes 3 hours of word nailing and intense reading plus hours of listening to audio sources.
Nobody wants language teachers who are not in command of what they teach, and anything less than 5 Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain hours of daily study is unacceptable.
However, in everyday life, and in particular over periods of months, nailing 50 words per day is a terrific challenge.
First, you need to recognise the words that your auditory brain cortex will soon be able to cut out from spoken language (see Chapter 2, Listening).
Reading is total immersion par excellence.
Just to make sure that we understand each other: I dont find word nailing thrilling and I can immediately name dozens of activities I would prefer to do.
Remember Chapter 1: The number of words you are familiar with determines your language abilities.
Nailing can be divided into three distinct activities: learning words, repeating words, and controlling words.
Remember the forgetting curve of the Memory chapter.
As learning is nothing and recalling is everything, the second pillar of word nailing is repetition.
For an overview on this topic, please see www.TheWordBrain.com/NailingSystems.
The second problem is more severe: lack of words.
Good language manuals usually present around 2,000 words  that is far short of your final word score of 515,000.
This is a miserable situation, because you are too good to continue working with manuals, but not good enough for reading essays, newspapers or novels.
Good compilations present around 7,000 words and offer free pronunciation audio files (see www.TheWordBrain.com/BookRecommendations).
Define the number of pages you will nail every day and start ploughing your way through them.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Nailing | While pioneering the world of words, you will one day have the curiosity to open a 200-page grammar book.
To your satisfaction, you will realise that daily listening to your audio sources (remember the manual CDs, TV programmes and audio books of the Listening chapter) has paved the way to understanding grammar.
As your word repertoire increases and the number of missing words diminishes, you will one day discover how exciting it is to work on essays, newspapers or novels.
At this point, you can even slow down your nailing rhythm, but only on one condition: that you extract from your reading sources double the number of words that is on your nailing schedule.
Germans will appreciate that Turkish is as beautiful as German; French people will be delighted that Arabic is as expressive and gentle as French; and Italians will be pleased to discover that Albanian is as subtle and amusing as Italian.
And struggling with Arabic taught me fundamental lessons for writing this guide.
About 20 percent indicated that they had used Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain drugs to stimulate concentration or memory.
