Goals | Introduction Goals Language surrounds us from when we are infants, language is the predominant mode of expression at school and university, and now that we are adults, new languages are everywhere.
In a globalised world  whether we like it or not  we live in an environment of multiple languages.
Modern times are polyglot times, and monoglot individuals begin to realise that speaking just one language has its disadvantages.
They start asking themselves how long it takes to learn another language and if languages are within the reach of everybody.
Typically, they also want to know how to choose good teachers and how to avoid bad teachers.
The Word Brain answers these questions.
The subtitle of the present guide, Fast Language Learning, may be subject to misunderstanding.
Fast is often equated with easy and, in the context of language learning, easiness could lead some readers to evoke miraculous second-language concoctions administered by charming teachers to engaged and engaging classmates.
When searching for language learning on the internet, you will see that it is all fun, sexy and child's play.
If thats the way you dream about approaching your next language, stop reading here.
There is nothing snug and cosy about The Word Brain.
On the contrary, this short guide for adults may appear harsh and rude, and demands your determination, Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain discipline, and perseverance.
If these are dirty words to you, walk away now.
The place where you will be told to learn your next language could be the second surprise.
Usually, adults think of language learning in terms of people interacting with each other, either in a beautiful city or a romantic countryside, in situations ranging from gentle and friendly meetings to tantra-inspired gatherings.
Again, you will find nothing of all this in The Word Brain.
When we later summarise how to rapidly achieve reading and comprehension skills, I will prescribe you months of lonely learning sessions with books and audio files.
If you dont like the idea that fast language learning is essentially a lonely battle, goodbye.
The third surprise is the route you need to take.
While I set the goals and define the time frame, it is up to you to find the most promising road to achieve your goals and to develop the skills needed for an effort that is going to last months and sometimes years.
You will partly invent yourself as your own teacher.
If you feel scared about this perspective, consider at least reading the first chapter, Words.
After that, you may decide that you have no time to learn a new language, but never again will you say that you have no talent for it.
This revelation might well be worth half an hour of reading.
So, do you still want to continue?
Then let me briefly explain how The Word Brain came to life.
It all started when, on one of those birthdays that are turning points in life, I offered myself an exclusive present most of my busy colleagues can rarely afford: time.
I would dedicate two consecutive years to learning my 7th language.
Just to complicate matters, I accepted a triple challenge: Web: TheWordBrain.com Goals 1.
2.
3.
| Learn a language at an advanced age  at 50, the memory is not what it used to be at 20.
Learn a language without teachers, using only books, CDs and TV.
Learn a difficult language: Arabic.
When I was young, I trained as a physician.
After working at the University Hospitals in Bonn and Frankfurt, I published and edited a small number of books (www.HepatologyTextbook.com and www.InfluenzaReport.com, among others) and created a handful of medical websites, one of which  www.Amedeo.com  has had the chance to become a Web Classic.
Aside from medicine, I have always cherished a second passion: the acquisition of other peoples languages.
I was fascinated to observe how new languages gradually entered my brain; to struggle with learning and forgetting; to feel the brain becoming saturated, craving for a break; and to discover how learning sometimes makes true quantum leaps, when sketchy pieces of knowledge suddenly coalesce into an almost-fluent understanding.
Sensing the dense fog of incomprehension that lifts over a landscape you have never seen before is an exhilarating experience.
My passion started at school where the languages I was taught  French, English, and Latin  had long-lasting consequences on my life.
At 17, I met a brilliant and attractive French teenager who is now my wife; English would prove useful for reading and writing in medicine; and Latin opened my eyes to the world of words.
One week before my 13th birthday, I used my new Christmas voice-recorder to register word lists from our school manual: rosa  die Rose; insula  die Insel; bestia  das Tier.
For several weeks thereafter, I would lie in bed at night and listen to the recordings in the dark.
I didnt know at the time that this first experiment with languages would cast the basis for my future medical career.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain Later in life, I took to the habit of learning languages by myself: Spanish in the early twenties, Italian after emigrating to Sardinia at the age of 27, Portuguese at 33 during a three-month trip to Brazil.
That put the modern language count at 6.
In between or thereafter, whenever there was the perspective of travel, I studied the basic grammar of other languages: Swedish, Dutch, Modern Greek, Turkish, Sardinian, Farsi (Iranian), Swahili, Hebrew, Hindi, Kabyle, Indonesian, Norwegian.
Don't worry!
With the exception of Sardinian and Dutch, I have never spoken any of these languages and hardly remember a single word of them.
But one of the consequences of repeated exposure to other languages is that, today, I read grammar as quickly and as passionately as I would read love letters.
In total, I have spent approximately 10 years of my life absorbing, playing and experimenting with language.
This guide summarises some of the lessons I have learned.
It is a guide for adults.
To make sure that you dont waste your time, let me describe the kind of adventure you are embarking on.
The Word Brain is not about counting (I, too, know Arabic.
I can count to 10.), ordering a dish of Italian pastasciutta or saying good morning (Buon giorno Guten Morgen), thank you (danke, merci, grazie gracias) or excuse me (Excusez-moi, sil vous plat; Mi scusi; Entschuldigen Sie bitte).
Most of these conversational exploits can easily be replaced by gestures.
I dont question the usefulness of teaching some language skills before going on a vacation, but this is not the scope of this guide.
The Word Brain is about the effort adults need to undertake to speak and understand another language.
I define speaking another language extensively.
The definition includes the ability Web: TheWordBrain.com Goals     | to read essays or newspapers to understand TV news or documentary programmes to imagine the correct spelling of words while listening to TV news or documentaries to understand everyday conversation In other words, The Word Brain describes the steps to metamorphosize yourself from a perfect illiterate to a person who has fluent hearing and reading abilities in another language.
To develop these abilities, you will ideally study on a daily basis.
Depending on a number of variables that I will discuss, the time estimated to accomplish your task is between one and five years.
I have condensed The Word Brain as much as possible so that you can read it in a couple of hours.
If you have learned other languages before, you will recognise some of your experiences and find explanations for your successes, failures or frustrations.
If you have to learn another language in the future, you might find some useful hints about how to streamline your project and save time.
Young teachers will read the following chapters with particular attention.
Although it is not a treaty on neuroscience, The Word Brain introduces basic concepts of processing and storage of information in our word brain.
Suggestions on how to use modern communication technologies to facilitate language teaching indicate avenues for future activities.
The first chapter will show you how language learning can partly be quantified, thus enabling you to plan your future effort over time.
In the subsequent chapters, you will hear such curious advice as Start listening, go on listening, continue listening  but please dont speak too early!; you will discover some of your extraordinary reading abilities; learn how differently your brain processes spoken words and written words; see the need of sequencing speech in small slices; discover the extraordinary Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain accomplishments of your memory; and, finally, conceive a strategic plan to crack your next language as quickly and as reliably as possible.
Reading newspapers, understanding TV  the bar is high.
Lets start with the number of new words you have to feed into your brain.
Be prepared for the worst.
Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | Words Words are the fuel of language and the number of words you are familiar with determines your language abilities.
The more words you know, the better you are.
Put in numbers, this statement reads as follows: 15,000 > 10,000 > 5,000 > 2,000 > 1,000 > 500 Between 2 and 18 years, you learned 10 new words every day.
Later, at work or at university, you enriched your brain vocabulary with thousands of technical words.
Now, after decades, you know more than 50,000 words of your native language.
Learning words is the hardcore task of language learning; in comparison, learning grammar is a finger exercise for pre-school children.
To be comfortable in another language you need roughly half of the words you possess in your native language  25,000.
As about 40 percent are variants of other words and can be easily inferred, a good estimate of truly unique words you need to start with is 15,000 words.
This is a huge number and double what you are Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain expected to learn in 8 years at school.
Fortunately, you do not always have to learn them all.
Take the word evolution.
In Spanish, Italian, and French, the word translates into evolucin, evoluzione and volution.
As you can see, many words are almost identical between some languages and come with just slight differences in packaging.
Once you understand the rules that govern these differences, you have immediate access to thousands of words.
In order to understand how many truly new words you will have to manage  words you have never seen before and which you cannot deduce from other languages you know  we need a short history of your linguistic abilities:  What is your native language?
 Have you learned other languages before?
 Which level did you achieve in these languages?
 Which language do you want to learn?
Based on your answers, good teachers are able to make a reliable estimate of the number of words you must transfer into your brain.
This number varies between 5,000 and 15,000.
Worstcase scenarios are languages that are completely different from any of the languages you know: for Europeans, typical examples are Hindi, Arabic, Japanese or Chinese.
In these languages, only a handful of words resemble European words and leave you with 15,000 words to absorb.
At the other end of the spectrum you will find languages that are closely related to those you already know.
If you ask a 17year-old French student without any previous exposure to the Italian language to screen an Italian dictionary, he will immediately be able to tell you the meaning of around 6,000 words.
Provide him with additional clues on how Latin words evolved differently, but still recognisably, into French and Italian, and he will easily increase his vocabulary to 10,000 and more.
The descendants of the Roman Empire  the Italians, Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | Spanish, Portuguese, French, and, to a lesser extent, Romanians  are therefore navigating in familiar waters when learning each others languages.
Once your teachers define the word quota you have to burn into your brain, the next question is: how long will it take me to learn these words? You may be surprised to know that the total study time for wiring a new word into livelong memory is around five minutes.
Children tend to have it easier because they have so-called fast-mapping abilities, a fabulous fast lane for word learning after a single exposure, which partly explains the prodigious rate at which they learn new words.
As an adult, however, you will take the long road, repeating new words over and over again.
Some words are easy, others are not.
Among the easy words are the words of everyday life, such as man, woman, child, water, air, big, small, go, come, do.
They are usually short and their meaning is unambiguous.
Other words are longer and will need more frequent rounds of rehearsal: Gerichtsvollzieher, jeopardy, abracadabrantesque, zanahoria, sgabuzzino, oramentrio, Bundesverfassungsgericht.
Still other words resist memorising because their very concept, or the difference between one word and another, remains vague and confusing even in your native language: haughty, valiant, valorous, courageous, intrepid, contemptuous.
And finally, how could you easily learn Semmelkndel without ever seeing it, sugo without smelling it, or tartiflette without eating it?
The Memory chapter shows in more detail that word learning is a result of repeated exposures over weeks and months, a succession of stations, a Via Dolorosa.
You will not be nailed to a cross, but dont be amazed that the stations of a typical Via Dolorosa may not suffice to nail new words permanently into your brain.
Learning is a biological process that requires new connections between brain cells, and these connections are being produced from a huge number of biochemical substances.
Give them time to grow.
Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain At a conservative estimate of 10 words per hour, it will take you 500 hours to learn 5,000 words (French/Spanish) and 1,500 hours to learn 15,000 words (European/Arabic).
Based on the number of hours you are prepared to invest on a daily basis, your total study time can be predicted with fairly good accuracy.
Take your daily study time from the left column in Table 1.1 and pick from the appropriate column on the right side (easy language: 5,000 words; difficult language, 15,000 words) the number of months you need to complete your word training.
As you can see, a quota of 5,000 or 15,000 words makes a huge difference.
For highly related languages that require learning of an additional vocabulary of 5,000 words, one hour per day is sufficient to be ready after two years.
With difficult languages and a word count of 15,000, a single daily study hour would put you on a frustratingly extended study course of 6 years.
Table 1.1: Study time (in months)* Number of words to learn 5,000 10,000 15,000 0.5 Hours/Day 1.5 * At five days per week; figures are rounded These numbers have important implications.
First, language learning means daily learning.
2-hours-a-week schedules are likely to be insufficient.
Two hours a week is like saying, I am preparing a Mount Everest ascension.
I climb two flight of stairs Web: TheWordBrain.com Words | twice every day. If you are not ready for daily practise, reconsider your project.
Low input cannot produce high output.
Second, language learning is mostly a do-it-yourself job.
The thousands of words you need to learn are currently outside your word brain and must get inside.
Nobody, except you, can do this job.
Be prepared to spend hundreds of hours alone with your language manuals, smartphone and dictionary.
Third, for adults and adolescents, language learning is a focused and persistent intellectual effort.
This is in stark contrast with the seemingly easy and playful way young children learn languages.
In order to learn like a child you would need to be born into a new family, with a new mother, a new father, new brothers and sisters, to be raised with love until the age of 6 and be sent to school for another 10 years.
Unfortunately  or fortunately  there is no way of simulating being the new child in a family and in a born-again childhood environment.
So, who is eligible to embark on a full-scale attack on another language in the sense we defined in the introduction, that is, being fluent in reading newspapers and understanding TV documentaries and day-to-day conversation?
It all depends on time.
If you have little or no time  think of busy physicians  or prefer to dedicate your time to geology, neuroscience, or evolutionary biology, new languages are out of reach.
Apart from these two cases, however, anyone who demonstrated the ability to learn the language of their parents are entitled to learn their next language.
The figures presented above are excellent news.
Language learning is not a bottomless pit, but is as predictable and quantifiable as climbing a mountain in excellent weather conditions.
You are planning the final ascent to the 4,808 m summit of Mont Blanc, starting at the Gouter Hut at 3,800 m?
As you know that it takes you 30 minutes to climb 100 meters, you can expect to reach the summit in about five hours.
Some of your Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain friends may get to the summit in 4 hours, others in 6 hours, but nobody will do it in 30 minutes.
There is another piece of good news.
As you will see in the coming chapters, importing 5,000 to 15,000 new words into your brain in 500 to 1,500 hours turns out to be THE major battlefield in language learning, representing 80 percent and more of your total effort.
In comparison, other aspects of language learning  grammar, pronunciation, etc.
 are minor construction sites.
If you are motivated and still willing to follow me, my first prescription would be that you start learning words on a daily basis, at least five days a week, and that you start now.
In Chapter 7, you will find a number of strategies to cope with hundreds of words every month.
You will discover that you have powerful allies.
One such ally is your smartphone, which will turn out to be a fabulous assistant to keep track of your progress, shortcomings, and successes.
What would you expect the second battlefield to be, grammar or pronunciation?
It is neither!
Against all expectations, grammar and pronunciation are theatres for minor skirmishes.
The second major task in language learning is speech recognition.
If I were your teacher, I would continue tomorrow working on sound waves and training your ears.
Decoding the sound track of people who speak an unknown language is a dizzy task.
Total workload after Chapter 1 500  1,500 hours Web: TheWordBrain.com Listening | Listening Have you recently listened to people speaking unfamiliar languages?
If you havent, turn on your smartphone or TV set, select a station from another country, and within minutes you will hit a broadcast with loquacious individuals talking all the time.
Alternatively, if you live in a metropolis, go down onto the streets and spot groups of animated people speaking foreign languages.
Listen attentively.
You will soon notice that humans produce continuous streams of uninterrupted speech.
The overall impression?
Phonological porridge, polenta, bouillie.
For the non-initiated listener, it is hard to grasp that there is much structure to such seemingly random proliferation of sound.
The reality is different, of course.
Any single language you come across on Earth is as differentiated, distinguished, beautiful, and funny as your native language.
Impenetrable as foreign languages appear to be, on the scale of a human lifetime, they are just around the corner  give them two or three years, and any of them is yours.
It is a refreshing thought that all humans are brothers and sisters in language.
A porridge-like sense of unintelligibility prevails even after years of language classes at school.
You are able to decipher a restaurant menu and order a dish of spaghetti, but comprehension vanishes as soon as the waiter starts talking.
The Print: Amazon.com | The Word Brain same happens with bakers, taxi drivers, and hotel employees  again polenta and pea soup.
It seems as if years of classes studying grammar and learning long lists of vocabulary produce little or no effect.
You can read Goethe, Shakespeare, Sartre, Cervantes, or Dante, and yet you dont understand their descendants.
Many of us conclude that we are inept at learning other languages and never try again.
The apparent easiness with which humans learn their native language during the first years of life, is intriguing.
