I CYBERNETICS IN HISTORY Since the end of World War II, I have been working on the many ramifications of the theory of messages.
Besides the electrical engineering theory of the trans mission of messages, there is a larger field which in cludes not only the study of language but the study of messages as a means of controlling machinery and society, the development of computing machines and other such automata, certain reflections upon psychol ogy and the nervous system, and a tentative new theory of scientific method.
Hence "Cybernetics," which I derived from the Greek word kubernetes, or "steersman," the same Greek word from which we eventually derive our word "governor."
I wrote a more or less technical book entitled Cybernetics which was published in 1948.
In response to a certain demand for me to make its ideas acceptable to the lay public, I published the first edition of The Human Use of Human Beings in 1950.
Since then the THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS subject has grown from a few ideas shared by Drs.
In giving the definition of Cybernetics in the original book, I classed communication and control together.
When I control the actions of another person, I communicate a message to him, and although this message is in the imperative mood, the technique of communication does not differ from that of a message of fact.
Furthermore, if my control is to be effective I must take cognizance of any messages from him which may indicate that the order is understood and has been obeyed.
Thus the theory of control in engineering, whether human or CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY animal or mechanical, is a chapter in the theory of messages.
Naturally there are detailed differences in messages and in problems of control, not only between a living organism and a machine, but within each narrower class of beings.
It is the purpose of Cybernetics to de velop a language and techniques that will enable us indeed to attack the problem of control and communi cation in general, but also to find the proper repertory of ideas and techniques to classify their particular manifestations under certain concepts.
In control and communication we are always  fighting nature's tendency to degrade the organized and to destroy the meaningful; the tendency, as Gibbs has shown us, for entropy to increase.
Information that he receives is co-ordinated through his brain and nervous system until, after the proper process of stora ge, collation, and selection, it emerges through effector organs, generally his muscles.
Information is a name for the content of what is exchanged with the outer world as we adjust to it, and make our adjustment felt upon it.
The process of receiving and of using information is the process of THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS our adjusting to the contingencies of the outer environ ment, and of our living effectively within that environ ment.
Thus, communication and control belong to the essence of man's inner life, even as they belong to his life in society.
It plays a large part in two of his most original ideas : that of the Character istica Universalis, or universal scientific language, and that of the Calculus Ratiocinator, or calcul!
This Calculus Ratiocinator, imperfect as it was, was the direct ancestor of modern mathematical logic.
The famous experiment of Michelson and MorIey, in the nineties, was undertaken to resolve this problem, and it gave the entirely unexpected answer that there simply was no way to determine the motion of matter through the ether.
The first satisfactory solution to the problems aroused by this experiment was that of Lorentz, who pointed out that if the forces holding matter together were con ceived as being themselves electrical or optical in nature, we should expect a negative result from the Michelson-Morley experiment.
of view of physics in which the world as it actually (; exists is replaced in some sense or other by the world ,as it happens to be <:>bseTY.g, and the old naIve realism Of physics gives Way to something on which Bishop Berkeley might have smiled with pleasure.
In Gibbs' view we have a physical _ ( ' . THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY quantity which belongs not to the outside world as such, but to certain sets of possible outside worlds, and therefore to the answer to certain specific questions which we can ask concerning the outside world.
They move in accordance with a pattern, but it is a pattern which is set in advance, and in which the past activity of the figures has practically nothing to do with the I r THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS pattern of their future activity.
But modern automatic ma chines such as the controlled missile, the proximity fuse, the automatic door opener, the control apparatus for a chemical factory, and the rest of the modern armory of automatic machines which perform military CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY or industrial functions, possess sense organs; that is, receptors for messages coming from the outside.
The automatic photo electric door opener is known to every person who has passed through the Pennsylvania Station in New York, and is used in many other buildings as well.
These are combinations, both of the data put in at the moment and of the records taken from the past stored data THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS which we call the mem01'y.
This control of a machine on the basis of its actual performance rather than its expected performance is known as feedback, and involves sen sory members which are actuated by motor members and perform the function of tell-tales or monit01's that is, of elements which indicate a performance.
It is the function of these mechanisms to control the me chanical tendency toward disorganization; in other CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY words, to produce a temporary and local reversal of the normal direction of entropy.
To obtain a performance as uniform as pos sible, it is customary to put into the gun a control feed back element which reads the lag of the gun behind the position it should have according to the orders given it, and which uses this difference to give the gun an extra push.
If the feedback system is itself controlled-if, in other words, its own entropic tendencies are checked by still other controlling mechanisms-and kept within limits suffi ciently stringent, this will not occur, and the existence of the feedback will increase the stability of perform ance of the gun.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS If I pick up my cigar, I do not will to move any specific muscles.
It is my thesis that the physical functioning of the living individual and the operation of some of the newer communication machines are precisely parallel in their analogous attempts to control entropy through feed back.
Modern physics, however, recognizes that the demon can only gain the information with which it opens or closes the door from something like a sense organ THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS which for these purposes is an eye.
Machines also contribute to a local and temporary building up of information, notwithstanding their crude and imperfect organiza tion compared with that of ourselves.
We have encountered this problem in the past in considering viruses, which show some of the tend encies of life-to persist, to multiply, and to organize- , ' THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS but do not express these tendencies in a fully-devel oped form.
As Humpty Dumpty says about some of his more remarkable words, "1 pay them extra, and make them do what 1 want."
Feedback may be as simple as that of the common reflex, or it may be a higher order feedback, in which past experience is used not only to regulate specific movements, but also whole policies of be havior.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS closing or opening of a switch.
The Manichaean devil is an opponent, 1 W. Ross Ashby, Design f01' a Brain, Wiley, New York, 1952, and W. Grey Walter, The Living Brain, Norton, New York, 1953 CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY like any other opponent, who is detennined on victory and will use any trick of craftiness or dissimulation to obtain this victory.
When Faust asked Mephistopheles what he was, Mephistopheles replied, "A part of that force which always seeks evil and always does good."
Nature offers I I I THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS resistance to decoding, but it does not show ingenuity in finding new and undecipherable methods for jam ming our communication with the outer world.
The crack in the fabric of the Enlightenment, marked by the French Revolution, was accompanied by doubts of progress elsewhere.
Malthus, for example, sees the cul ture of his age about to sink into the slough of an un controlled increase in population, swallowing up all the gains so far made by humanity.
He points out that a machine of rather random and hap hazard structure will have certain near-equilibrium positions, and certain positions far from equilibrium, and that the near-equilibrium patterns will by  their very nature last for a long time, while the others will TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS appear only temporarily.
"-Quantum theory has led, for our purposes, to a new CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY association of energy and information.
Remember THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS that we ourselves constitute such an island of decrease ing entropy, and that we live among other such islands.
However, even this limited consideration of the future is foreign to th emotional euphoria of the average man, and partic4lady tQ that of the average American.
The education of the average American child of the upper middle class is such as to guard him solicitously against the awareness of death and doom.
He is brought up in an atmosphere of Santa Claus; and when he learns that Santa Claus is a myth, he cries bitterly.
Factually, it asserts that the earlier advance of geographical discovery, whose inception corresponds to the beginning of modern times, is to be continued / THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS into an indefinite period of invention, of the discovery of new techniques for controlling the human environ ment.
It is possible to believe in progress as a fact with out believing in progress as an ethical principle; but in the catechism of many Americans, the one goes with the other.
The Hebrew prophets are far from cheerful in their evaluation of the future of mankind, or even of their chosen Israel; and the great morality play of Job, while it grants him a victory of the spirit, and while the Lord deigns to return to him his Hocks and his servants and his wives, nevertheless gives no assurance that such a 1 CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY relatively happy outcome will take place except through the arbitrariness of God.
Nor is Islam, whose very name means resignation to the will of God, any more receptive to the ideal of prog ress.
Of Buddhism, with its hope for Nirvana and a release from the external Wheel of Circumstance, I need say nothing; it is inexorably opposed to the idea of progress, and this is equally true for all the kindred religions of India.
Besides the comfortable passive belief in progress, which many Americans shared at the end of the nine teenth century, there is another one which seems to have a more masculine, vigorous connotation.
To the average American, progress means the winning of the West.
For many years, the de velopment of the United States took place against the background of the empty land that always lay further to the West.
The musket with which most of the Civil War was fought was TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS only a slight improvement over that carried at Water loo, and that in turn was nearly interchangeable with the Brown Bess of Marlborough's army in the Low Countries.
It is doubtful whether the smoothbore musket ever much exceeded in range the best of the longbows, and it is certain that it never equaled them in accuracy nor in speed of fire; yet the longbow is the almost unimproved invention of the Stone Age.
Even a sailor from the ship that took Saint Paul to Malta would have been quite reasonably at home as a forecastle hand on one of Joseph Conrad's barks.
A Roman cattleman from the D acian frontier would have made quite a competent vaquero to drive longhorn steers from the plains of Texas to the terminus of the railroad, although he would have been struck with astonishment with what he found when he got there.
A Babylonian administra tor of a temple estate would have needed no training either in bookkeeping or in the handling of slaves to run an early Southern plantation.
In the age of discovery Europe had become aware for the first time of the existence of great thinly-settled areas capable of taking up a population exceeding that of Europe itself; a land full of unexplored resources, not only of gold and silver but of the other commodities of commerce as well.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS When the tea and cakes were exhausted at one seat, the natural thing for the Mad Hatter and the March Hare was to move on and occupy the next seat.
As time passed, the tea table of the Americas had proved not to be inexhaustible; and as a matter of fact, the rate at which one seat has been abandoned for the next has been increasing at what is probably a still increasing pace.
We are the slaves of our technical improvement and we can no more return a New Hampshire farm to the self-con tained state in which it was maintained in 1800 than we can, by taking thought, add a cubit to our stature or, what is more to the point, diminish it.
Learning, like more primitive forms of feed back, is a process which reads differently forward and backward in time.
When the great control rooms at the locks of the Panama Canal are in use, they are two-way message centers.
Not only do messages go out controlling the motion of the tow locomotives, the opening and closing of the sluices, and the opening and closing of the gates; but the control room is full of telltales which indicate not merely that the locomotives, the sluices, and the gates have received their orders, but that they have in fact effectively carried out these orders.
This principle in control applies not merely to the Panama locks, but to states, armies, and individual hu man beings.
When in the American Revolution, orders already drawn up had failed, through carelessness, to go from England commanding a British army to march down from Canada to meet another British army marching up from New York at Saratoga, Burgoyne's forces met a catastrophic defeat which a well con ceived program of two-way communications would have avoided.
The purpose of applause in the theater-and THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS it is essential-is to establish in the performer's mind some modicum of two-way communication.
There are communities like the Eskimos, among whom there seems to be no chieftainship and very little subordi nation, so that the basis of the social community is sim ply the common desire to survive against enormous odds of climate and food supply.
There are socially stratified communities such as are found in India, in which the means of communication between two in dividuals are closely restricted and modified by their ancestry and position.
Most of us in the United States prefer to live in a moderately loose social community, in which the blocks to communication among individuals and classes are not too great.
I will not say that this ideal of communi cation is attained in the United States.
Within the American social picture, it is shameful to have these yearnings, and this denial of opportunities im plied by an uncertain future.
On the other hand, I wish to show that the human individual, capable of vast learning and study, THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS which may occupy almost half of his life, is physically equipped, as the ant is not, for this capacity.
The vertebrates have developed not only internal , THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS skeletons, but other features as well which suit them for active life.
Metamorphosis is too radical to leave much lasting .
These tubules are stiffened against collapse by spiral fibers of chitin, and are thus passively open, but there is nowhere evidence of an I TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS active and effective system of air pumping.
The answer is that Cybernetics takes the view that the structure of the machine or of the organism is an index of the performance that may be ex pected from it.
Among the animals, man is a Peter Pan who never grows up.
Puberty for most mammals either represents the end of their epoch of tutelage, or is well beyond it.
Now, as the present technique of switching generally goes, the process of reaching one of the people whom we call up four or five times a day is in no way different from the process of reaching those p eople with whom we may THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS never have a conversation.
I repeat, feedback is a method of controlling a system by reinserting into it the results of its past perform ance.
If these results are merely used as numerical data for the criticism of the system and its regulation, we have the simple feedback of the control engineers.
At the beginning of World War II, the comparative inefficiency of anti-aircraft fire made it necessary to introduce apparatus which would follow the position of an airplane, compute its distance, de termine the length of time before a shell could reach it, and figure out where it would be at the end of that time.
He is limited by the fact that if h e makes a rapid turn, cen trifugal force will render him unconscious; and by the other fact that the control mechanism of his plane and the course of instructions which he has received prac tically force on him certain regular habits of control which show themselves even in his evasive action.
Let us remember THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS that in the pursuit of a target as rapid as an airplane, there is not time for the computer to take out his instruments and figure where the plane is going to be.
All the figuring must be built into the gun control itself.
However, there is another stage of the control prob lem which may also be dealt with mechanically.
The problem of determining the Hight statistics of a plane from the actual observation of its Hight, and then of transforming these into rules for controlling the gun, is itself a definite and mathematical one.
We thus may construct an anti-aircraft gun which ob serves by itself the statistics concerning the motion of the target plane, which then works these into a system of control, and which finally adopts this system of con trol as a quick way for adjusting its position to the observed position and motion of the plane.
I also do not intend to ignore THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS the fact that some incoming fibers, instead of tending to produce a stimulus in the outgoing fibers with which they connect, may tend to prevent these fibers from accepting new stimuli.
It has great advantag66 for the most varied problems of communication and control.
Besides these machines which work on a yes-and-no scale, there are other computing and control machines which measure rather than count.
We have already seen that these thresholds are variable with temperature, and we have THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS no reason to believe that they may not be variable with the chemistry of the blood and with many other phenomena which are not themselves originally of an all-or-none nature.
It is therefore necessary that in con sidering the problem of learning, we should be most wary of assuming an all-or-none theory of the nervous system, without having made an intellectual criticism of the notion, and without specific experimental evi dence to back our assumption.
The early natural historians were the practical frontiersmen of the intellect; too TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS much under the compulsion to seize and occupy new territory to be very precise in treating the problem of explaining the new forms that they had observed.
The change in the stimulus for which a given response takes place must have some such nervous cor relate as the opening of a synaptic pathway leading to the response which would otherwise have been closed, or the closing of one which would otherwise have been open; and thus constitutes what Cybernetics calls a change in taping.
I THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS Such a change in taping is preceded by the contin ued association of the old, strong, natural stimulus for a particular reaction and the new concomitant one.
Let us remember that these "To-whom-it-may-con cern" influences bear a certain similarity to the sort of r THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS changes in the anti-aircraft control apparatus which carry all new statistics to the instrument, rather than to those which directly carry only specific numerical data.
Nevertheless, it is interesting to know that the sort of phenomenon which is recorded subjectively as emo tion may not be merely a useless epiphenomenon of nervous action, but may control some essential stage in learning, and in other similar processes.
Language, in fact, is in one sense another name for communication itself, as well as a word used to describe the codes through which com munication takes place.
Birds communicate with one another, monkeys communicate with one another, insects communicate with one another, and in all this communicati<m some use is made of signals or symbols which can be under stood only by being privy to the system of codes in volved.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS they may share to a certain degree with the machines man has constructed.
For example, in the wilder stretches of our own West and of Northern Canada, there are many possible power sites far from any settlement where the workers can live, and too small to justify the foundation of new set tlements on their own account, though not so small that the power systems are able to neglect them.
To this message we m ay apply all the notions of Cybernetics, or the theory of mess ages.
However, this  :n p  TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS represents not the infonnation actually carried by the line, but the maximum amount it might carry, if it were to lead into proper terminal equipment.
Its actual performance of opening and closing switches, of pulling generators into phase, of controlling the How of water in sluices, and of turning the turbines on or off, may be regarded as a language in itself, with a system of probabilities of behavior given by its own history.
It is clear, for example" THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS that the ear and the brain h ave an effective frequency cutoff preventing the reception of some high frequen cies which can penetrate the ear and can be trans mitted by the telephone.
This fact again is a corollary of the second law of thermodynam ics, and is necessarily true if at each stage we regard the information transmitted as the maximum infor- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS mation that could be transmitted with an appropriately coded receiving system.
It apparently is built into the brain itself, that we are to have a pre - i \ TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS occupation with codes and with the sounds of speech, and that the preoccupation with codes can be extended from those dealing with speech to those that concern themselves with visual stimuli.
The gift of speech does not go back to a universal Adamite language dis rupted in the Tower of Babel.
As my father was a very heretical philologist whose influence tended to lead philology in much the same direction as the modern influences of communication theory, I wish to continue this chapter with a few THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS amateurish reflections on the history of language and the history of our theory of language.
The riddle of the Sphinx is a primitive conception of wisdom.
The respect for writing goes so far in some parts of China that people are loath to throw away scraps of old newspapers and useless frag ments of books.
Accordingly, the Bible of the Christians and the Jews, the sacred books of the Persians and the Hindus, the Buddhist scriptures, the writings of Confucius, all have their early commenta tors.
The early speculation that Hebrew was the language of man in Paradise, and that the confusion of language originated at the building of the Tower of Babel, need not interest us here as anything more than a primitive precursor of scientific thought.
A book such as Ducange's Glossarium Mediae atque In fimae Latinitatis could not exist without its being clear that the roots of the Romance languages are not only in Latin, but in vulgar Latin.
There must have been many learned rabbis who were well aware of the re semblance of Hebrew, Arabic, and Syriac.
When, under the advice of the much maligned Warren Hastings, the East India Company founded its School of Oriental Studies at Fort William, it was no longer possible to ignore that Greek and Latin on the one hand, and Sanskrit on the other, were cut from the same cloth.
At the beginning of the last century the work of the brothers Grimm and of the Dane, Rask, showed not only that the Teutonic languages came within the or bit of this so-called Indo-European group, but went further to make clear the linguistic relations of these languages to one another, and to a supposed distant common parent.
not appli- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS cable.
In the face of the existence of Mischsprachen, of lan guages such as Lingua Franca, Swahili, Yiddish, Chi nook Jargon, and even to a considerable extent English, there has been an attempt to trace each lan guage to a single legitimate ancestor, and to treat the other participants in its origin as nothing more than godparents of the newborn child.
It is scarcely until the recent work of Otto Jespersen that any considerable group of philologists have had objectivity enough to make of their science a repre sentation of language as it is actually spoken and written, rather than a copybook attempt to teach the Eskimos how to speak Eskimo, and the Chinese how to write Chinese.
First among these, perhaps" is the way in which the Latin language, like the earlier generation of classical gods, has been slain by its own children.
During the Middle Ages Latin of a varying quality, the best of it quite acceptable to anyone but a pedant, remained the universal language of the clergy and of all learned men throughout Western Europe, even as Arabic has remained in the Moslem world down to the CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY present day.
It may be thought that the rise of the vulgar lan guages of Europe must necessarily have marked the end of the function of Latin.
In India, notwithstanding the growth of the neo-Sanskritic lan guages, Sanskrit has shown a remarkable vitality last ing down to the present day.
The Moslem world, as I have said, is united by a tradition of classical Arabic, even though the majority of Moslems are not Arabic speakers and the spoken Arabic of the present day has divided itself into a number of very different dialects.
He put it into the form of an imaginary trip which he took through a modern uni versity, as the guide and mentor to a reincarnated Aristotle.
His talk began by presenting in the pillory bits of technical jargon from each modern intellectual field, which he supposed himself to have presented to Aristotle as horrible examples.
May I remark that all we possess of Aristotle is what amounts to the school notebooks of his disciples, written in one of the most crabbed technical jargons in the history of the world, and totally unintelligible to any contemporary Greek who had not been through the discipline of the Lyceum?
That this jargon has been sanctified by his tory, so that it has become itself an object of classical education, is not relevant; for this happened after Aristotle, not contemporaneously with him.
The impor tant thing is that the Greek language of the time of Aristotle was ready to compromise with the technical jargon of a brilliant scholar, while even the English of CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY his learned and reverend successors is not willing to compromise with the similar needs of modern speech.
The heart of the Persian Empire was the Royal Road and the relay of messengers who conveyed the Royal Word along it.
The great empire of Rome was possible THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS only because of Rome's progress in roadbuilding.
With the airplane and the radio the word of the rulers extends to the ends of the earth, and very many of the factors which previously precluded a World State have been abrogated.
It is even possible to maintain that modern communication, which forces us to adjudicate the in ternational claims of different broadcasting systems and different airplane nets, has made the World State inevitable.
subject to the overwhelming tendency for entropy to inclease, for information to leak in transit, unless certain external agents are introduced to control it.
This distribution is very different from what will be found in an artificial language, such as Esperanto or Volapiik.
Language may strive simply against nature's tendency to confuse it or against willful human at tempts to subvert its meaning.1 Normal communica tive discourse, whose major opponent is the entropic tendency of nature itself, is not confronted by an active enemy, conscious of its own purposes.
The desire to apply Cybernetics of semantics, as a discipline to control the loss of meaning from language, has already resulted in certain problems.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS is not the quantity of information sent that is impor tant for action, but rather the quantity of information which can penetrate into a communication and storage apparatus sufficiently to serve as the trigger for action.
Now let us consider an information system used to control the sort of electric power sub-station of which we spoke earlier in the chapter.
From the point of view of Cybernetics, semantics defines the extent of meaning and controls its loss in a communications system.
Phantasy has always been at the service of philosophy, and Plato was not ashamed to clothe his epistemology in the metaphor of the cave.
g6 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS ourselves.
He supposed that aerial travel had so united the world that war was obsolete, and that all the world's really important af fairs were in the hands of an Aerial Board of Control, whose primary responsibility extended to air traffic, while its secondary responsibility extended to "all that that implies."
In this way, he imagined that the various local authorities had gradually been compelled to drop their rights, or had allowed their local rights to lapse; and that the central authority of the Aerial Board of Control had taken these responsibilities over.
His mil lennium is the millennium of a British colonel back from India.
He does not seem to realize that where a man's word goes, and where his power of perception goes, to that point his control and in a sense his physical ex jstence is extended.
To see the greater importance of the transportation of information as compared with mere physical trans portation, let us suppose that we have an architect in Europe supervising the construction of a building in the United States.
Under these con ditions, even without transmitting or receiving any THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS material commodities, the architect may take an active part in the construction of the building.
In the most final Heaven of the Buddhists, however, the state of Nirvana, the soul loses its separate identity and is absorbed into the Great Soul of the World.
In the mammal, spermatozoa TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS are infinitely easier to find and to see than ova.
This is nothing but the normal phenomenon of identi cal twinning in a case in which the anatomical accessi bility of the embryo is sufficient to permit CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY experimentation.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS the memory by the organism of the effects of its past : development.
In order for this message to be significant at all, it must convey at least as much information as an entire set of the Encyclopedia Britannica.
VI LAW AND COMMUNICATION Law may be defined as the ethical control applied to communication, and to language as a form of com munication, especially when this normative aspect is under the control of some authority sufficiently strong to give its decisions an effective social sanction.
The best words to express these requirements are those of the French Revolution: Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite.
These mean: the liberty of each human being to develop in his freedom the full TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS measure of the human possibilities embodied in him; the equality by which what is just for A and B remains just when the positions of A and B are interchanged; and a good will between man and man that knows no limits short of those of humanity itself.
The Roman law and its descendants, which indeed constitute the greater part of the law of the European continent, belong to this class.
The judges, those to whom is confided the task of the interpretation of the law, should perform their function in such a spirit that if Judge A is replaced by Judge B , the exchange cannot be expected t o make a material change in the court's interpretation of customs and of 1 08 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS statutes.
The history of our dealings with the Indians is full of instances in point, both for the dangers of duress and the dangers of ambiguity.
From the very early times of the colonies, the Indians had neither the bulk of population nor the equality of arms to meet the whites on a fair basis, especially when the so-called land trea ties between the whites and the Indians were being n e gotiated.
The Indians as a hunting people had no idea of land as private property.
On the other hand, the whites believed, if we are to give their conduct the most favorable interpretation that can be assigned to it, that the Indians were conveying to them a title to ownership in fee simple.
Law seems to consider punishment, now as a threat to discourage other possible criminals, now as a ritual act of expiation on the part of the guilty man, now as a device for removing him from society and for protecting the latter from the danger of repeated misconduct, and noW as an agency for the social and the moral reform of the b ig t : l ) r l 1 10 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS individual.
Thus the problems of law may be con sidered communicative and cybernetic-that is, they are problems of orderly and repeatable control of cer tain critical situations.
It is a game in the full Von Neumann sense; a game in which the litigants try by methods which are limited by the code of law to obtain the judge and the jury as their partners.
On the other hand, under the impetus of Senator McCarthy and his imitators, the blind and excessive classification of military information, and the recent attacks on the State Department, we are approaching a secretive frame of mind paralleled in history only in the Venice of the Renaissance.
There the extraordinarily precise news-gathering services of the Venetian ambassadors ( which form one of our chief sources of European history ) accompanied a national jealousy of secrets, exaggerated to such an extent that the state ordered the private assassination of emigrant artisans, to maintain the monopoly of cer tain chosen arts and crafts.
The modern game of cops and robbers which seems to characterize both Russia and the United States, the two principal contestants for world power of this century, suggests the old Italian cloak-and-dagger melodrama played on a much larger stage.
I am writing this book primarily for Americans in whose environment questions of information will be evaluated according to a standard American criterion: a thing is valuable as a commodity for what it will bring in the open market.
This is the official doctrine of an orthodoxy which it is becoming more and more perilous for a resident of the United States to question.
The fate of information in the typically American world is to become something which can be bought or sold.
This philosophy represented a fairly close approximation to the actual situation in the now ending period when inventions were generally made 1 14 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS ' in the shop by skilled handicraftsmen.
This second sort of ingenuity is labeled the dis covery of a law of nature; and in the United States, as well as in many other countries with similar in dustrial practices, the legal code denies to the dis coverer any property rights in a law of nature which he may have discovered.
In the United States, E dison represents the precise transition between the Doyces and the men of the Mudfog Association.
The General Electric Company, the Westinghouse interests, and the Bell Telephone Lab oratories followed in his footsteps, employing scien tists by hundreds where Edison employed them by tens.
At present, the invention is losing its identity as a THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS commodity in the face of the general intellectual structure of emergent inventions.
Information, on the other hand, cannot be conserved as easily, for as we have already seen the amount of information communicated is related to the non-addi tive quantity known as entropy and differs from it by its algebraic sign and a possible numerical factor.
Information and entropy are not con served, and are equally unsuited to being commod ities.
The stamp market, the rare book market, the market for Sandwich glass and for Duncan Phyfe furniture are all artificial, in the sense that in addition to the real pleasure which the posses sion of such an object gives to its owner, much of the value of the fac;on pertains not only to the rarity of the object itself, but to the momentary existence of an ac tive group of buyers competing for it.
He cannot place them 1 18 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS in a fireproof cabinet and gloat over them at a small dinner for a few connoisseurs, nor shut them up alto gether as private possessions.
There are very few fres coes which are given the adventitious privacy of the one by Siqueiros which adorns a large wall of the Mex ican jail where he served a sentence for a political offense.
It is only when the study of such an author has penetrated to a layer deeper than that which has been absorbed into the superficial cliches of the time, that THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS we can re-establish with him an informative rapport, and give him a new and fresh literary value.
England was the first country to go through a full-scale industrial revolution; and from this early age it inherited the nar row gauge of its railways, the heavy investment of its cotton mills in obsolete equipment, and the limitations of its social system, which have made the cumulative needs of the present day into an overwhelming emer gency, only to be met by what amounts to a social and industrial revolution.
What is true of England is true of New England, which has discovered that it is often a far more ex pensive matter to modernize an industry than to scrap it and to start somewhere else.
Quite apart from the difficulties of having a relatively strict industrial law and an advanced labor policy, one of the chief reasons that New England is being deserted by the textile mills is that, frankly, they prefer not to be hampered by a century of traditions.
Information is more a matter of process than of stor age.
That country will have the greatest security whose TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS informational and scientific situation is adequate to meet the demands that may be put on it-the country in which it is fully realized that infonnation is important as a stage in the continuous process by which we observe the outer world, and act effectively upon it.
There is no Maginot Line of the brain.
In general, there must be at least a THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS mi nimum degree of repetition of patterns, without which the very short passages lacking repetition cannot be deciphered.
We all know how the Rosetta Stone was decoded through an interpretation of certain characters in the Egyptian version, which turned out to be the names of the Ptolemies.
THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS Without any doubt, we possess the world's most , highly developed technique of combining the efforts , of large numbers of scientists and large quantities of ; money toward the realization of a single project.
skill by which the French and English do great I amounts of work with apparatus which an American high-school teacher would scorn as a casual stick-and string job, is not to be found among any but a vanish- I ingly small minority of our young men.
Such loose human organizations do exist even in the United States; but at present they represent the result of the efforts of a few disinterested men, and not the planned frame into which we are being forced by those who imagine they know what is good for us.
These may be due to the fact that they either are precisely those weapons which are more effe ctively employable against us than against THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS any enemy of ours, or are dangers, such as that of radio active poisoning, which are inherent in our very use of such a weapon as the atomic bomb.
For example, the concentrated effort of Oak Ridge and Los Alamos in time of war has made the question of the protection of the people of the United States, not only from the possible enemies em ploying an atomic bomb, but from the atomic radia tion of our new industry, a thing which concerns us now.
This enemy may be Russia at the present mo ment, but it is even more the reHection of ourselves in a mirage.
Even the new psychology of advertising and salesmanship becomes in their hands a way for obliter- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS ating the conscientious scruples of the working scien tists, and for destroying such inhibitions as they may have against rowing into this maelstrom.
A hundred and fifty years ago or even fifty years ago-it does not matter which-the world and America in particular were full of small journals and presses through which almost any man could obtain a hearing.
It is not the question whether a show may excite a great interest in a considerable number of peo ple that interests the entrepreneur, but rather the ques tion of whether it will be unacceptable to so few that 1 32 THE lWMAN USE OF lWMAN BEINGS he can count on selling it indiscriminately to movie theaters from coast to coast.
Lord only knows that there are enough problems 1 34 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS yet to b e solved, books to be written, and music to be composed!
Navigation is an art which dates to ancient times, but CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY 't had one conspicuous weakness until the seventeen irties.
In order to do this, we must either carry the Greenwich time with us on a chronometer or we must find some heav enly clock other than the sun to take the place of a chronometer.
It can be rec ognized in the course taken by Columbus, in that of the Silver Fleet, and that of the Acapulco galleons.
In the firs t place, the overseas interests of England and France, unlike those of Spain, lay in high latitudes, where the advantage of a direct great-circle course  1 38 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS over an east-and-west course is most conspicuous.
Such clumsy devices became obsolete with the intro- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS duction of the perfected engines of Watt, which were employed quite early in their history for factory pur.
At worst, as in , the silver mines of New Spain, it was done by the labor , of human slaves.
ment of questionable value to the sails carried by every ' seagoing steamboat; but it was steam transportation ' on the Mississippi which opened up the interior of the  United States.
Machine spinning first became nec es sary in order to furnish warps for hand looms.
There was an exploitation of the labor of children and women to an extent, and of a brutality scarcely conceivable at the present time-that is, if we forget the South African diamond mines and ignore the new industrialization of China and India and the general terms of plantation labor in almost every country.
By this, I mean that a great many of the disastrous conse quences and phases of the earlier part of the industrial revolution were not so much due to any moral obtuse ness or iniquity on the part of those concerned, as to certain technical features which were inherent in the ,early means of industrialization, and which the later THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS history of technical development has thrust more or ', less into the background.
TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS It is true, however, that these non-mechanical factories ' were very soon superseded by mechanical ones, and that probably the worst social effects of urban crowd ing and of rural depopulation took place in the \ machine factory.
As late as 1 915, I crossed the ocean on one of the old ships of the American Line.
These wheels were supposed to control the ship in the event that its automatic steering engine broke down.
This was not the usual method of control of the ship, but an emergency replacement, or as sailors call it, a "jury steering wheel."
For normal control, the ship car ried a steering engine which translated the relatively small forces of the quartermaster at the wheel into the movement of the massive rudder.
This is the basis of the modern radio industry, but it is also an 1 46 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS industrial tool which is spreading widely into new fields.
It is thus no longer necessary to control a process at high energy-levels by a mechanism in which the im portant details of control are carried out at these levels.
It is quite possible to form a certain pattern of behavior response at levels much lower even than those found in usual radio sets, and then to employ a series of am plifying tubes to control by this apparatus a machine as heavy as a steel-rolling mill.
There were sporadic uses of the vacuum tube and of its sister invention, the photoelectric cell, for scan ning the products of industry; as for example, for regulating the thickness of a web coming out of a paper machine, or for inspecting the color of a can of pine- 1 48 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS apples.
This involves the problem of fire control.
Thus the problem of anti-aircraft fire control made a new generation of engineers familiar with the notion of a communication addressed to a machine rather than to a person.
During the period immediately preceding World War II other uses were found for the vacuum tube coupled directly to the machine rather than to the hu man agent.
Thus one man is able to control the lift ing of a load of many tons.
In the early days of Vannevar Bush's work, before there were any high speed automatic controls in fac- 1 50 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS tories, I had become interested in the problem of partial differential equation.
Here there enters the prin ciple of feedback, which we have already discussed, and which is older than its exemplification in the ship's steering engine, and is at least as old, in fact, as the governor which regulates the speed of Watt's steam THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS engine.
There is some sort of apparatus which notes the distance between this member and the tiller; and this distance controls the admission of steam to the ports of a steam steering-engine, or some similar electrical admission in the case of an electrical steering-engine.
These means promise to be the future standard method of designing control apparatus .
It is fair to say, however, that except for a considerable number of isolated examples, the industrial revolution up to the present has displaced man and the beast as a source of power, without making any great impression 1 54 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS on other human functions.
It is also possible that the actual contin gencies met in the performance of the machine may be handed over as a basis of further regulation to a new control tape constructed by the machine itself, or to a modification of the old one.
Even this price would not be forbidding for the control machine of a really large factory, but it is not the relevant price.
A similar machine of smaller capacity, not suited for the most difficult computational problems, but nevertheless quite adequate for factory control, would probably cost no more than a few thousand dollars in any sort of moderate-scale production.
This is true, whether we consider the memory apparatus, the logical apparatus, or the arithmetical I' , , 1 56 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS subassembly.
On the one hand, it receives its detailed instruc tions from elements of the nature of sense organs, such as photoelectric cells, condensers for the reading of the thickness of a web of paper, thermometers, hydrogen ion-concentration meters, and the general run of ap paratus now built by instrument companies for the manual control of industrial processes.
Besides these sense organs, the control system must CYBERNETICS AND SOCIETY 1 57 contain effectors, or components which act on the outer world.
Thus the machine may carry out feedback operations, either those of the simple type now so thoroughly un derstood, or those involving more complicated proc esses of discrimination, regulated by the central control as a logical or mathematical system.
They are also familiar in paper fac- 1 58 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS tories, which likewise produce a continuous output.
number of workers to risk their lives in its control, and in which an emergency is likely to be so serious and costly that its possibilities should have been considered in advance, rather than left to the excited judgment of somebody on the spot.
In the assembly line, as in the chemical factory, or the contin uous-process paper mill, it is necessary to exert a cer tain statistical control on the quality of the product.
This control depends on a sampling process .
In other words, except again at the highest levels, the ma chine takes care of the routine statistical controls, as well as of the production process.
There will, of course, be trades into which the new industrial revolution will not penetrate either be cause the new control machines are not economical in industries on so small a scale as not to be able to carry the considerable capital costs involved, or because their work is so varied that a new taping will be neces sary for almost every job.
Where THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS such machines may be used, some use of machinery of judgment is not inconceivable.
If we should en gage in a war with a major power like Russia, which would make serious demands on the infantry, and con sequently on our manpower, we may be hard put to keep up our industrial production.
We are already as far along in the process of developing a unified system of automatic control ma chines as we were in the development of radar in 1939.
This is the history of the lumber and mining industries, and is part of what we have called in another chapter the traditional American philosophy of progress.
We shall see a process parallel to the way in which the use of atomic energy for bombs has been allowed to compromise the very necessary potentialities of the long-time use of atomic power to replace our oil and coal supplies, which are within cen- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS turies, if not decades, of utter exhaustion.
x SOME COMMUNICATION MACHINES AND THEIR FUTURE I devoted the last chapter to the problem of the in dustrial and social impact of certain control machines which are already beginning to show important pos sibilities for the replacement of human labor.
TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS There is another type of human tremor which is in some ways diametrically opposite to intention tremor.
It is known as Parkinsonianism, and is familiar to all of us as the shaking palsy of old men.
When he attempts to accomplish a dennite purpose this tremor subsides to such an extent that the victim of an early stage of Parkinsonianism can even be a successful eye surgeon.
In order to do this, a secondary feedback mechanism is required, whose locus in the brain does not seem to be the cerebellum, which is the central control station of the mechanism which breaks down in intention tremor.
B. Wiesner of the Electron ics Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Tech nology discussed with me the possibility of constructing a tropism machine or machine with a simple fixed built-in purpose, with parts sufficiently adjustable to show the main phenomena of voluntary feedback, and of what we have just called postural feedback, and their breakdown.
There is thus a feedback dependent on the source of THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS light proceeding from the light to the photoelectric cells, and thence to the rudder control system, by which it finally regulates the direction of its own motion and changes the angle of incidence of the light.
This phenomenon in man is what we have described as Parkinsonianism.
I have recently received a letter from Dr. Grey Wal ter of the Burden Neurological Institute at Bristol, England, in which he expresses interest in "the moth" or "bedbug," and in which he tells me of a similar mech anism of his own, which differs from mine in having a determined but variable purpose.
The United States Army Medical Corps has taken photographs of "the moth" to compare with photographs of actual cases of nervous tremor, so that they are thus of assistance in the instruction of army neurologists.
Some time ago, Professor Wiesner told me that he was interested in the possibility of constructing an aid THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS for the totally deaf, and that he would like to hear my views on the subject.
We were aware of the work that had already been done on visible speech at the Bell Telephone Laboratories, and its relation to their earlier work on the Vocoder.
We knew that the Vocoder work gave us a measure of the amount of information which it was necessary to transmit for the intelligibility of speech more favorable than that of any previous method.
We found out very soon after starting that the inves tigators at the Bell Laboratories had also considered the possibility of a tactile reception of sound, and had included it in their patent application.
They were kind enough to tell us that they had done no experimental work on it, and that they left us free to go ahead on our researches.
The present status of our apparatus is this : the transition between the first and the new second stage is well under control, although there are certain technical difficulties still to be overcome.
Other uses of hearing are important, such as the reception of 1 70 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS the sounds of nature and the appreciation of music, but they are not so important that we should consider a person as socially deaf if he shared in the ordinary, in terpersonal communication by speech, and in no other use of hearing.
We have said that the best work done on this prob lem of estimation is the Vocoder work of the Bell Tele phone Laboratories.
It may be used to show that if human speech is properly divided into not more than five bands, and if these are rectified so that only their form-envelopes or outer shapes are perceived, and are used to modulate quite arbitrary sounds within their ...- 1 72 TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS frequency range, then if these sounds are finally added up, the original speech is recognizable as speech and almost recognizable as the speech of a particular in dividual.
The precise way we do this in the apparatus we are considering is by separat ing the frequency bands of speech as in the Vocoder, and then by transmitting these different rectified bands to spatially distant tactile regions, after they have been used to modulate vibrations of frequencies easily per ceived by the skin.
Here let me mention some earlier machines of Dr. Walter, somewhat simi lar to my "moth" or "bug," but which were built for a 1 74 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS diHerent purpose.
In this case, the nor mal feedback in the medulla and brain stem of the healthy person will be used even in the paralytic to supply the control of his breathing.
Poe discussed a fraudulent chess playing machine due to Maelzel, and exposed it; show ing that it was worked by a legless cripple inside.
Professor John von Neumann of the Institute for Ad vanced Studies at Princeton has commented on this difficulty.
Yet for beings living TIlE lillMAN USE OF lillMAN BEINGS long enough, as von Neumann has shown, it would be possible; and a game played perfectly on each side would lead, as a foregone conclusion, either always to a win for White, or always to a win for Black, or most probably always to a draw.
To begin with, his evaluation of the final position after two moves would make allowances for the control of the board, for the mutual protection of the pieces, etc., as well as the number of pieces, check, and checkmate.
As an honest man, I cannot deny that a certain element 1 78 THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS of ostentatious narcissism is present in me, at least.
The great book of von Neumann and Morgenstern on the Theory of Games has made a profound impression on the world, and not least in Washington.
In the well-known Paris journal, Le Monde, for December 28, 1 948, a certain Dominican friar, Pere Dubarle, has written a very penetrating review of my book Cybernetics.
For outside of the very serious problems which the volume of information to be collected and to be treated rapidly THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS still put, the problems of the stability of prediction re main beyond what we can seriously dream of controlling.
A very good example of this seems to be given by what happened to the Gallup Poll in the 1 948 election.
We are run ning the risk nowadays of a great World State, where deliberate and conscious primitive injustice may be the only possible condition for the statistical happiness of the masses : a world worse than hell for every clear mind.
The machine a gouverner of Pere Dubarle is not frightening because of any danger that it may achieve autonomous control over humanity.
Its real danger, however, is the quite different one that such machines, though helpless by themselves, may be used by a human being or a block of human beings to increase their control over the rest of the human race or that political leaders may attempt to control their populations by means not of machines themselves but through political techniques as narrow and in different to human possibility as if they had, in fact, been conceived mechanically.
But even without the state machine of Pere Dubar:le we are already developing new concepts of war, of economic conflict, and of propaganda on the basis of von Neumann's Theory of Games, which is itself a com municational theory, as the developments of the' 1950S have already shown.
While the philosophy behind it is probably not acceptable to our present opponents, the Communists, there are strong THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS signs that its possibilities are already being studied in Russia as well as here, and that the Russians, not con tent with accepting the theory as we have presented it, have conceivably refined it in certain important re spects.
There is a considerable amount of evidence, rather in deed than in words, that the Russians have supplemented this attitude to the world game by considering the psychological limits of the players and especially their fatigability as part of the game itself.
In other words, we must know as scientists what man's nature is and what his built-in purposes are, even when we must wield this knowledge as soldiers and as statesmen; and we must know why we wish to control him.
There is one quality more important than "know-how" and we cannot accuse the United States of any undue amount of it.
Some years ago, a prominent American engineer bought an expensive player-piano.
These simple and obvious truths represent the childish equivalent of the tragic view of life which the Greeks and many modern THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS Europeans possess, and which is somehow missing in this land of plenty.
I have said that the modern man, and especially the modern American, however much "know-how" he may have, has very little "know-what."
In doing so, he will put himself sooner or later in the position of the father in W. W. Jacobs' The Monkey's Paw, who has wished for a hundred pounds, only to find at his door the agent of the com pany for which his son works, tendering him one hundred pounds as a consolation for his son's death at the factory.
Or again, he may do it in the way of the Arab fisherman in the One Tlwmand and One Nights, when he broke the Seal of Solomon on the lid of the bottle which contained the angry djinnee.
Let us remember that there are game-playing ma chines both of the Monkey's Paw type and of the type of the Bottled Djinnee.
Whether we entrust our decisions to ma chines of metal, or to those machines of flesh and blood TIlE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS which are bureaus and vast laboratories and armies and corporations, we shall never receive the right an swers to our questions unless we ask the right questions.
The Monkey's Paw of skin and bone is quite as deadly as anything cast out of steel and iron.
( .. XI LANGUAGE, CONFUSION, AND JAM In Chapter IV, I have referred to some very inter esting work recently carried out by Dr. Benoit Man delbrot of Paris and Professor Jacobson of Harvard on various phenomena of language including, among other things, a discussion of the optimum distribution of the length of words.
Literally speaking, the game theory of von Neumann, which is involved in this connection, concerns one team which is deliberately trying to get the message across, and another team which will resort to any strategy to jam the message.
In the strict von Neumann theory of games this means that the speaker and listener co operate on policy in view of the assumption that the jamming agency is adopting the best policy to confuse them, again under the assumption that the speaker and the listener have been using the best policy up to the present, and so on.
In more usual language, both the team of communi cants and the jamming forces are at liberty to use the technique of bluffing to confound one another, and in general this technique will be used to prevent the other TIIE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS side from being able to act on a firm knowledge of the technique of one side.
Nature plays fair and if, after climbing one range of mountains, the physicist sees another on the horizon before him, it has not been deliberately put there to frustrate the effort he has already made.
Communication in general, and scientific research in particular, involve a great deal of effort even if it is useful effort, and the fighting of bogies which are not there wastes effort which ought to be economized.
It follows almost by a syllogism that there are other professions besides that of the detective which can and do disqualify a man for the most effective scientific work, both by making him suspect nature of disingenu ousness, and by making him disingenuous in his atti- THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS tude to nature and to questions about nature.
Thus a religious military order is almost bound to s et a great value on obedience, confessions of faith, THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS and all the restricting influences which hamstring the scientist.
Thus it is no accident that Russia has had its Berias and that we have our McCarthys.
