Several years passed this way, almost as if I had never had any epiphany, but then one day, when I was a beginning assistant professor at Indiana University, I met a highly thoughtful woman who had adopted the same vegetarian philosophy as I once had, and had done so for similar reasons, but she had stuck to it for a longer time than I had.
Quite rightly, he is saying that the piece is majestic and noble, but more controversially, he is drawing a dividing line between different levels or sizes of human souls, suggesting that some people are simply not up to playing this piece, not because of any physical limitations of their bodies, but because their souls are not large enough.
Small-souled and Large-souled Humans Some of us believe in capital punishment  the intentional public squelching of a human soul, no matter how ardently that soul would plead for mercy, would tremble, would shake, would shriek, would desperately struggle to escape, on being led down the corridor to the site of their doom.
It is most unlikely that you, a reader of this book, have missed all the Star Wars movies, with their rather unforgettable characters C-3PO and R2-D2.
I would also argue that most peoples largely unconscious prejudices about whether to eat or not to eat this or that food, whether to buy or not to buy this or that article of clothing, whether to swat or not to swat this or that insect, whether to root or not to root for this or that species of robot in a sci-fi film, whether to be sad or not to be sad if a human character in a film or a novel meets with a violent end, whether to claim or not to claim that a particular senescent person is no longer there, and so forth, reflect precisely this kind of numerical continuum in their minds, whether they admit it or not.
The answer is, No, it does not.
Even though I sincerely believe there is much more of a soul in the twenty-year-old than in the two-year-old (a view that will no doubt dismay many readers), I nonetheless have enormous respect for the potential of the two-year-old to develop a much larger soul over the course of a dozen or so years.
Thinkodynamics and Statistical Mentalics It thus comes as no news to anyone that different levels of description have different kinds of utility, depending on the purpose and the context, and I have accordingly summarized my view of this simple truth as it applies to the world of thinking and the brain: Thinkodynamics is explained by statistical mentalics, as well as its flipped-around version: Statistical mentalics can be bypassed by talking at the level of thinkodynamics.
What do I mean by these two terms, thinkodynamics and statistical mentalics?
By contrast, by mentalics I mean the small-scale phenomena that neurologists traditionally study: how neurotransmitters cross synapses, how cells are wired together, how cell assemblies reverberate in synchrony, and so forth.
In particular, in the domino chainium, there could be a stretch called the prime stretch whose dominos all topple when the set of potential divisors has been exhausted, which means that the input has been determined to be prime.
In a word, 641 is the prime mover.
So I ask: Who shoves whom around inside the domino chainium?
Of course this image is far-fetched, but remember that the careenium is merely intended as a useful metaphor for understanding our brains, and the fact is that our brains, too, are rather far-fetched, in the sense that they too contain tiny events (neuron firings) and larger events (patterns of neuron firings), and the latter presumably somehow have representational qualities, allowing us to register and also to remember things that happen outside of our crania.
Taking the Reductionistic View of the Careenium The first inclination of a modern physicist who heard this story might be reductionistic, in the sense of pooh-poohing the large simmballs as mere epiphenomena, meaning that although they are undeniably there, they are not essential to an understanding of the system, since they are composed of simms.
After all, we ourselves are pretty big epiphenomena, and as Ive already observed many times in this book, this fact dooms us to talking about the world in terms of other epiphenomena at about our size level (e.g., our mothers and fathers, our cats and cars and cakes, our sailboats and saxophones and sassafras trees).
(The colloidal particles here play the role of simmballs, and the water molecules play the role of simms.)
The Dance of the Simmballs From our higher-level macroscopic vantage point as we hover above the table, we can see ideas giving rise to other ideas, we can see one symbolic event reminding the system of another symbolic event, we can see elaborate patterns of simmballs coming together and forming even larger patterns that constitute analogies  in short, we can visually eavesdrop on the logic of a thinking mind taking place in the patterned dance of the simmballs.
We were escorted to an area of the store that had several TV screens on a shelf, and a video camera was plugged into the back of one of them, thus allowing us to see what the camera was looking at and to gauge its color accuracy and such things.
I took the camera and pointed it at my father, and we saw his amused smile jump right up onto the screen.
But then, inevitably, I felt compelled to try pointing the camera at the TV screen itself.
And how did I react to his sudden panic?
As in audio feedback, it would have to come from some kind of amplification of the lights intensity; however, we know that video cameras are not designed to amplify an image in any way, but simply to transmit it to a different place.
Some years earlier, Russell had been struggling to ground mathematics in the theory of sets, which he was convinced constituted the deepest bedrock of human thought, but just when he thought he was within sight of his goal, he unexpectedly discovered a terrible loophole in set theory.
A sentence must be in existence before a speaker can say, This sentence is false, and the response itself will not serve, since it did not exist until it was emitted.
CHAPTER 5 On Video Feedback Two Video Voyages, Three Decades Apart THE loop of video feedback is rich, as I found out in my first explorations with our familys new video camera in the mid-1970s.
I made an appointment at the Stanford University television studios, and upon arriving I found that the very friendly fellow there had already set up a TV and a camera on a tripod for me to play around with.
It was a piece of cake to point the camera at the screen, zoom in and out, tilt the camera, change angles, regulate brightness and contrast, and so on.
It is no more surprising than the fact that audio feedback can take place or that a TV camera can be pointed at a screen to which its image is being sent.
The next stage, obviously, is where the leash is sufficiently long and flexible that the video camera can point straight at the center of the screen.
Can the camera tilt or not, and if so, by how much?
Is there some way for the video camera itself to appear on the screen?
In general, one would think that the larger the number, the longer any description of it would have to be, but it all depends on how easily the number is expressible in terms of landmark integers  those rare integers that have exceptionally short names or descriptions, such as ten to the trillion, with its extremely economic five-syllable description.
Since it always takes such a large number of syllables to describe it, we know that b must be a huge integer.
Is Church Latin a language?
Idealistic Dreams about Metamathematics Back in those heady days of my youth, every time I entered a university bookstore (and that was as often as possible), I would instantly swoop down on the mathematics section and scour all the books that had to do with symbolic logic and the nature of symbols and meaning.
Mathematical reasoning seemed to have been precisely characterized as the repeated use of certain basic rules of logic, dubbed rules of inference, such as modus ponens: If you have proven a result X and you have also proven X  Y (where the arrow represents the concept of implication, so that the line means If X is true, then Y is also true), then you can toss Y into the bin of proven results.
Since, as it happens, longer wffs are built up in PM from shorter wffs by just a few simple and standard rules of typographical juxtaposition, their larger code numbers can likewise be built up from the smaller code numbers of shorter ones by just a few simple and standard rules of numerical calculation.
Now wff numbers are, as it happens, relatively easy to define in a recursive fashion, and for that reason wff-ness (exactly like F-ness) is just the kind of mathematical notion that Principia Mathematica was designed to study.
Prim Numbers Having realized that some hypothetical volume of the series by Whitehead and Russell could define and systematically explore the various numerical properties of wff numbers, Gdel pushed his analogy further and showed, with a good deal of fancy machinery but actually not very much conceptual difficulty, that there was an infinitely more interesting recursively defined class of whole numbers, which I shall here call prim numbers (whimsically saluting the title of the famous three tomes), and which are the numbers belonging to provable formulas of PM (i.e., theorems).
There is a crucial difference between wff numbers and prim numbers, which comes from the fact that the rules of inference of PM sometimes produce output strings that are shorter than their input strings.
This means that the corresponding arithmetical rules defining prim numbers will sometimes take large prim numbers as input and make from them a smaller prim number as output.
Just as with squares, primes, F numbers, or wff numbers, there could once again be a hypothetical volume of the series of tomes by Whitehead and Russell in which prim numbers were defined and their mathematical properties studied.
Sometimes this second phraseology is pointedly rendered as I am not a theorem or, even more tersely, as I am unprovable (where in the PM system is tacitly understood).
So Quines Quip talks about itself, claiming of itself that it is a full sentence (which it surely is, even though it is built out of two subjectless sentence fragments, one in quote marks and one not).
And then, making a move analogous to that of feeding Quines Quasi-Quip into itself (but in quotes), he took that formula fragments Gdel number k (which is a specific number, not a variable) and replaced the variable x by it, thus producing a formula (not just a fragment) that made a claim about a much larger integer, g. And g is the Gdel number of that very claim.
The above sentence is neither fish nor fowl, for it is not a formula of Principia Mathematica but an English sentence, so of course it doesnt have a Gdel number and it couldnt possibly be a theorem (or a nontheorem) of PM.
And you might also try to remember that the little number k is the Gdel number of a formula fragment containing a variable x, analogous to a subjectless sentence fragment in quote marks, while the larger number g is the Gdel number of a complete sentence in PM notation, analogous to a complete sentence in English.
To be specific, not only do they have the large box in their own hands, but they can see the little box the girl is holding, and the two boxes have a lot in common (their cylindrical shape, their dark-blue color, their white caps at both ends); and in case thats not enough, they can also see salt spilling out of the little one.
It is all too easy to forget that moths, flies, dogs, cats, neonates, television cameras, and other small-souled beings do not perceive a television screen as we do.
Drama lovers considered this new way of understanding the play too delicious for words, for it revealed Prince Hyppia to be a play-about-a-play (with a vengeance!
Indeed, he went so far as to insist that Gerd Klots review could not conceivably be about Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica but had to be about another play, possibly a related play, perhaps an analogous play, perchance even a perfectly parallel play, peradventure a play with a similarsounding title penned by a pair of paranoiac paradoxophobes, but in any case it was not about his play.
Now, now, I hear some voice protesting (but of course its not your voice), how on earth could you have really been talking about Whitehead and Russell and Principia Mathematica if the lines you wrote were not about them but about Y. Ted Enrustle and Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica and such things?
Something may have troubled you when you learned that Prince Hyppias famous line about the number g proclaims (via analogy) its own unpennability.
Or, turning this question around, how could Prince Hyppias classic line be found in Y. Ted Enrustles play if it never was penned at all?
Not is Not the Source of Strangeness A reader might conclude that a strange loop necessarily involves a self-undermining or self-negating quality (This formula is not provable; This line is not pennable; You should not be attending this play).
In the cases of both Prince Hyppia: Math Dramatica and Principia Mathematica, we saw that a system carefully designed to talk only about numbers and not to talk about itself nonetheless ineluctably winds up talking about itself in a cagey fashion  and it does so precisely because of the chameleonic nature of numbers, which are so rich and complex that numerical patterns have the flexibility to mirror any other kind of pattern.
Just as it is no miracle that a video system can create a selfreferential loop, but rather a kind of obvious triviality due to the power of TV cameras (or, to put it more precisely, the immensely rich representational power of very large arrays of pixels), so too it is no miracle that Principia Mathematica (or any other comparable system) contains self-focused sentences like Gdels formula, for the system of integers, exactly like a TV camera (only more so!
Strings provable in the larger and allegedly superior system Super-PM would be isomorphically imitated by a richer set of numbers than the prim numbers (hence lets call them super-prim numbers).
At this point, just as he did for PM, Gdel would promptly create a new formula KH for Super-PM that said, The number h is not a super-prim number, and of course he would do it in such a way that h would be the Gdel number of KH itself.
In other words, the hole in PM (and in any other axiomatic system as rich as PM) is not due to some careless oversight by Russell and Whitehead but is simply an inevitable property of any system that is flexible enough to capture the chameleonic quality of whole numbers.
PM is rich enough to be able to turn around and point at itself, like a television camera pointing at the screen to which it is sending its image.
The laws of particle physics dont respect such notions as hog, cell, gene, or genetic code, or even the notion of amino acid.
This is far too large a task for finite folks like us, and so we have to settle for a compromise, which is to look at things at a less inclusive, less detailed level, but (fortunately for us) a more insight-providing level, namely the informational level.
An I loop, like an audio feedback loop, is an abstraction  but an abstraction that seems immensely real, almost physically palpable, to beings like us, beings that have high readings on the hunekometer.
I Am My Brains Most Complex Symbol Like a careenium (and also like PM), a brain can be seen on at (at least) two levels  a low level involving very small physical processes (perhaps involving particles, perhaps involving neurons  take your pick), and a high level involving large structures selectively triggerable by perception, which in this book I have called symbols, and which are the structures in our brain that constitute our categories.
The new screen is then taken in by the camera and fed back in, and around and around it goes.
In Chapter 1, when I spoke of small souls and large souls, I said that this is not a black-and-white matter but one of degree.
(thanks to the incredibly spartan symbol repertoire of a mosquito brain, barely larger than the symbol repertoire of a flush toilet or a thermostat), and accordingly, I have no qualms about dismissing the idea of there being a strange loop of selfhood in as tiny and swattable a brain as that of a mosquito.
One can see this event taking place on the videotape made by that camera, and it is the climax of the whole story.
This would require the vehicle to have a full episodic memory of thousands of experiences it had had, as well as an episodic projectory (what it would expect to happen in its life, and what it would hope, and what it would fear), as well as an episodic subjunctory, detailing its thoughts about near misses it had had, and what would most likely have happened had things gone some other way.
The symbols in our brains truly do do that voodoo that they do so well, and they do it in the electrochemical soup of neural events.
Of course, in all this, you would have radically changed the Sanskrit language, carrying it forwards in time a few thousand years, but that is how languages always progress.
What makes a strange loop appear in a brain and not in a video feedback system, then, is an ability  the ability to think  which is, in effect, a one-syllable word standing for the possession of a sufficiently large repertoire of triggerable symbols.
Since we all perceive and represent hundreds of other human beings at vastly differing levels of detail and fidelity inside our cranium, and since the most important facet of all of those human beings is their own sense of self, we inevitably mirror, and thus house, a large number of other strange loops inside our head.
If one points a TV camera at the middle of a blank screen, and if the camera sees only the screen and none of its frame, then despite its loopiness, all that this setup will produce, whether the camera stands still, tilts, turns, or zooms in and out (always without reaching the screens edge), is a fixed white image.
Suppose two video cameras and two televisions are set up so that camera A feeds screen A and, far away from it, camera B feeds screen B.
Lets assume, as would seem natural, that camera A is closer to screen A than it is to screen B (and vice versa).
Then loop A will take up more space on screen A than does loop B, meaning more pixels, and so loop A will be reproduced with higher fidelity on screen A. Loop A will be large and fine-grained, loop B will be small and coarse-grained.
The difference is that camera A is feeding its image directly to screen A (and not screen B), while camera B is directly feeding screen B (and not screen A).
(To be sure, the nested image of screen A on screen B will tilt or grow, all the way down the line of ever-more-nested images  but the orientation and size of the top-level screen in system B will remain unchanged, while those of the top-level screen in system A will be directly affected by what camera A does.)
This may seem extremely far-fetched, but the curious thing is, our standard earthly world has much in common with Siamese Twinwirld.
Universal Beings We human beings, too, are universal machines of a different sort: our neural hardware can copy arbitrary patterns, even if evolution never had any grand plan for this kind of representational universality to come about.
They might have some superficial textures in common here and there, but to me they are as different as Bach and Eminem.)
And yet, to reiterate the metaphor, since our camera and our screen are grainy, we cannot have as deep or as accurate a representation of people beloved to us as either our own self-representation or their own self-representation.
One time when I had returned to Bloomington, I realized I had made a serious typesetting mistake in one chapter, and so, in panic, I called up my friend Scott Kim, who also had been spending endless hours in the Imlac room, and I was hugely relieved to find him there.
Theres no claim that the act of copying is simultaneous or perfect or total  just that each person lives partially in the brain of the other, and that if the bandwidth were turned up more and more and more and still more, they would come to live more and more inside each other  until, in the limit, the sense of a clear boundary between them would slowly be dissolved, as it is for the two halves of a Twinwirld pairson (and even more so for a Siamese Twinwirld pairson).
They are the atoms of meaning out of which larger structures of meaning are built.
I say its closer to that answer rather than saying that it is that answer, because Parfits view, like mine in this book, is that these things that seem so black-and white to us actually come in shades of gray  its just that in ordinary circumstances, things are always so close to being pure black or white that any hints of grayness remain hidden from view, not only thanks to the obvious external fact that we all have separate physical brains housed in separate skulls, but also thanks to an extensive web of linguistic and cultural conventions that collectively and subliminally insist that we each are exactly one person (this is the caged-bird metaphor of Chapter 18, and its also the Cartesian Ego notion), and which implicitly discourage us from imagining any kind of blending, overlapping, or sharing of souls.
If switch after switch were thrown, converting Parfit more and more into Napoleon, at what stage would he  or rather, at what stage would this slowly morphing person  simply be Napoleon?
As I have already made clear, asking exactly where along the line the switchover would take place makes no sense from Parfits point of view, for what matters is psychological continuity ( i.e., proximity in that quasimathematical space of personalities or brains that I suggested a little while ago), and that is a feature that comes in all shades of gray.
In Parfits view, the Cartesian Ego of Napoleon is not indivisible, nor is that of Derek Parfit.
It implicitly suggests, once again, a sharp, black-and-white dichotomy between a set of hypothetical machines that think (such machines would merely think but would have no inner life) and a different set of hypothetical machines who think (these machines would have an inner life, and each one would be a particular someone).
All of these things survive at different levels in many people who, thanks to having interacted with him intimately over many years or decades, constitute his soular corona  his wife, his three children, and his many, many friends.
Fancy 100-hunekerand-higher racecar brains like yours and mine have a lot of self-perception and hence a lot of consciousness, while very primitive wind-up rubber-band brains like those of mosquitoes have essentially none of it, and lastly, middle-level brains, with just a handful of hunekers (like that of a two-year-old, or a pet cat or dog) come with a modicum of it.
Imagine a philosophical school called liphosophy whose disciples, known as liphosophers, believe in an elusive  in fact, undetectable  and yet terribly important nonphysical quality called Leafpilishness (always with a capital L) and who also believe that there are certain special entities in our universe that are imbued with this happy quality.
No matter what your opinion is on consciousness, reader, I suspect you would scratch your head at the tenets of liphosophy.
This may merely be a lexical gap or a confusing semantic blur in these languages (the meaning on a literal level is co-knowledge), but even if thats the case, I nonetheless think of it as offering us an insight that might otherwise never occur to us: that the partial internalization of other creatures interiority (conscience) is what most clearly marks off creatures who have large souls (much consciousness) from creatures that have small souls, and from yet others that have none or next to none.
I was naturally filled with gratification when the popularity of my book Gdel, Escher, Bach linked my name in some fashion in the musical community with that of Bach (this was a true honor), and in Bachs 300th birthyear, 1985, I had the pleasure of participating in several tricentennial celebrations, including a tiny one on his exact birthday that I organized in Ann Arbor for the members of a class I was teaching, plus a few friends, the highlight of which was the small firestorm unleashed when we lit all 300 candles on the giant birthday cake I had ordered.
So I would say that those who strike us as self-less are in fact very soul-full  that is, they house many other souls inside their own skulls/brains/minds/souls  and I dont think this sharing of mind-space diminishes their central core but enlarges and enriches it.
