The methods I present here are all based on two key objectives:(1) capturing all the things that need to get donenow, later, someday, big, little, or in betweeninto a logical and trusted system outside of your head and off your mind; and (2) disciplining yourself to make front-end decisions about all of me "inputs" you THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE let into your life so that you will always have a plan for "next actions" that you can implement or renegotiate at any moment.
Why Things Are on Your Mind Most often, the reason something is "on your mind" is that you want it to be different than it currently is, and yet:  you haven't clarified exactly what the intended outcome is;  you haven't decided what the very next physical action step is; and/or  you haven't put reminders of the outcome and the action required in a system you trust.
The big difference between what I do and what others do is that I capture and organize 100 percent of my "stuff" in and with objective tools at There is usually an inverse proportion between how much something is on your mind and how much it's getting done.
I have discovered that one of the major reasons many people haven't had a lot of success with "getting organized" is simply that they have tried to do all five phases at one time.
In order for your mind to let go of the lower-level task of trying to hang on THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE to everything, you have to know that you have truly captured everything that might represent something you have to do, and that at some point in the near future you will process and review all of it.
Minimize the Number of Collection Buckets You should have as many in-baskets as you need and as few as you can get by with.
Emptying the bucket does not mean that you have to finish what's in your voice-mail, e-mail, or in-basket; it just means you have to take it out of the container, decide what it is and what should be done with it, and, if it's still unfinished, organize it into your system.
and 2 | What's the next action required?
If the action will take longer than two minutes, and you are the right person to do it, you will have to defer acting on it until later and track it on one or more "Next Actions" lists.
To manage actionable things, you will need a list of projects, storage or files for project plans and materials, a calendar, a list of reminders of next actions, and a list of reminders of things you're waiting for.
For instance, the list of current projects could be kept on a page in a Day Runner; it could be a "To Do" category on a PDA; or it could be in a file labeled "Projects List."
They just need to be on a master list so you can review them regularly enough to ensure that appropriate next actions have been defined for each of them.
Support Materials and Reference Files Once you have organized your project support material by theme or topic, you will probably find that it is almost identical to your reference material and could be kept in the same reference file system (a "Wedding" file could be kept in the general-reference files, for instance).
What does need to be tracked is every action that has to happen at a specific time or on a specific day (enter these in your calendar); those that need to be done as soon as they can (add these to your "Next Actions" lists); and all those that you are waiting for others to do (put these on a "Waiting For" list).
Calendar Reminders of actions you need to take fall into two categories: those about things that have to happen on a specific day or time, and those about things that just need to get done as soon as possible.
What to Review When If you set up a personal organization system structured as I recommend, with a "Projects" list, a calendar, "Next Actions" lists, THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE and a "Waiting For" list, not much will be required to maintain that system.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE Do The basic purpose of this workflow-management process is to facilitate good choices about what you're doing at any Every decision to point in time.
Once you have defined all your work, you can trust that your lists of things to do are complete.
In order to know what your priorities are, you have to know what your work is.
But they still have very little to do with what people are doing or what they're inspired about.
How do you want or need to work with others on this project to ensure its success?
It can be CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING quite a challenge, however, to identify with images of You often need to success if they represent new and foreign territory make it up in your that is, if you have few reference points about what mind before you an event might actually look like and little experience can make it happen in your life.
What if there's still more planning to be done before you can feel comfortable with what's next?
Most projects, given my definition of a project as an outcome requiring more than one action, need no more than a listing of their outcome and next action for you to get If the project is still them off your mind.
You planning to do.
You'll still be doing the full planning model on all of them, but only in your head, and just enough to figure out next actions and keep them going until they're complete.
If there's CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING a lack of clarity at the planning level, there's probably a need for more brainstorming to generate a sufficient inventory of ideas to create trust in the plan.
As you'll discover through this process, it's critical that you have at least a satellite home PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO You must have a focused work space at home, at work, and if possible even in system identical to the one in your office.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Calendar Although you may not need a calendar just to collect your incomplete items, you'll certainly come up with actions that need to be put there, too.
Where and how often might you need to review them?
When considering whether to get and use an organizer, and if so, which one, keep in mind that all you really need to do is manage lists.
If you have to get up every time you have some ad hoc piece of paper you want to file, you'll tend to stack it instead of filing it, and you're also likely to just resist the whole in-basket process (because you subconsciously know there's stuff in there that might need filing!).
Keep in mind, you can feel good about what you're not doing, only when you know what you're not doing.
They all go into "in," so they'll be available for later processing.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Issues About Collecting As you engage in the collecting phase, you may run into one or more of the following:  you've got a lot more than will fit into one in-basket;  you're likely to get derailed into purging and organizing;  you may have some form of stuff already collected and organized; and/or  you're likely to run across some critical things that you want to keep in front of you.
You'll be able to decide about it later, when you process the in-basket.
If there is, put it into "in" so you can deal with it later in the process.
If there are actionable items, you know what to do: make a note and put it in "in."
I recommend that you read through this chapter and the next one, on organizing your actions, before you actually start processing what you've collected in "in."
Processing all the things in your world will make you more conscious of what you are going to do and what you should not be doing.
If there's something that needs to be done about the item in "in," then you need to decide what exactly that next action is.
Many people think they've determined the "next action" when they get it down to "set meeting."
Well, it could be with a phone physical action is, call or an e-mail, but to whom?
Many people are amazed by how many two-minute actions are possible, often on some of their most critical current projects.
probably have You need to make a list of projects.
In this chapter I'll lead you through the organizing steps and tools that will be required as you process your in-basket.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS WORKFLOW DIAGRAMORGANIZING PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO The Basic Categories There are seven primary types of things that you'll want to keep track of and manage from an organizational perspective:  A "Projects" list  Project support material  Calendared actions and information  "Next Actions" lists  A "Waiting For" list  Reference material  A "Someday/Maybe" list The Importance of Hard Edges It's critical that all of these categories be kept pristinely distinct from one another.
If you have a project that you're not going to be doing anything about for some time, it must go onto your "Someday/Maybe" list so you can relate to the "Projects" list with the rigorous action-generating focus it needs.
You'll want to sort all of this into groupings that make sense to you so you can review them as options for work to do when you have time.
The Actions That Go on Your Calendar For the purposes of organization, as I've said, there are two basic kinds of actions: those that must be done on a certain day and/or at a particular time, and those that just need to be done as soon as you can get to them, around your other calendared items.
The Most Common Categories of Action Reminders You'll probably find that at least a few of the following common list headings for next actions will make sense for you:  "Calls"  "At Computer" "Errand's"  "Office Actions" or "At Office" (miscellaneous)  "At Home"  "Agendas" (for people and meetings)  "Read/Review" "Calls" This is the list of all the phone calls you need to make; you can work off it as long as you have a phone available.
"Office Actions'/"At Office" If you work in an office, there will be certain things that you can do only there, and a list of those will be a useful thing to have in front of you thenthough obviously, if you have a phone and a computer in your office, and you have "Calls" and "At Computer" as separate lists, they'll be in play as well.
I'm sure you've got numerous personal and around-the-house projects, and often the CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS next thing to do on them is just to do them.
When the next action on something is up to someone else, you don't need an action reminder, just a trigger about what you're waiting for from whom.
If the next action on a service order is to make a call, it should be in a "Calls" group; if the action step is to review information and input it into the computer, it should be labeled "At Computer."
supply the reminders you need to see when you need to see them, so you can trust your choices about what you're doing (and what you're not doing).
If you haven't done so already, I recommend that initially you make a "Projects" list in a very simple format, similar to the ones you've used for your lists of actions: it can be a category in a digital organizer, a page in a loose-leaf planner, or even a single file folder labeled "PROJECTS," with either a master list or separate sheets of paper for each one.
While you could, of course, put them on your "Waiting For" list, it might make better sense to create a "ProjectsDelegated" list to track CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS them: your task will be simply to review the list regularly enough to ensure that everything on it is moving along appropriately.
If you make the large project your one listing on your "Projects" list, you'll want to keep a list of the subprojects and/or the project plan itself as "project support material" to be reviewed when you come to that major item.
The only time you should have attention on your reference material is when you need to change your system in some way because you have too much or too little information, given your needs or preferences.
The problem most people have psychologically with all their stuff is that it's still "stuff"that is, they haven't decided what's PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO actionable and what's not.
Relative to your personal organization and productivity, this is not a core issue, If material is purely so long as all of your projects and actions are in a for reference, the control system that you work with regularly.
They may be review, all of which will work to get them off your some of the most current radar and your mind.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS This is a big topic to devote so little space to, I know, but go ahead and ask yourself, "Is there any major decision for which I should create a future trigger, so I can feel comfortable just 'hanging out' with it for now?"
You must be assured that you're doing what you need to be doing, and that it's OK to be not doing what you're not doing.
This is really just common sense, but few people actually have their processes and their organization honed to the point where they are as functional as they could be.
My answer is simply, you need for review, "As much time as I need to to feel comfortable about as long as you're what I'm doing."
What most things at the right people don't realize is that my lists are in one sense time.
Then Your Action Lists After you review all your day- and time-specific commitments and handle whatever you need to about them, your next most frequent area for review will be the lists of all the actions you could possibly do in your current context.
The Right Review in the Right Context You may need to access any one of your lists at any time.
Put it all into your in-basket for processing.
All of my action lists are set up this way, so I have to decide on the very next physical action before I can know which list to put an item on (is this something that requires the computer?
As I explained earlier, during the course of the workday, at any point in time, you'll be engaged in one of three types of activities:  Doing predefined work  Doing work as it shows up  Defining your work You may be doing things on your action lists, doing things as they come up, or processing incoming inputs to determine what work that needs to be done, either then or later, from your lists.
You can be processing e-mails while you're on hold PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Do ad hoc work as it shows up, not because it is the path of least resistance, but because it is the thing you need to do, vis-a-vis all the rest.
And ultimately, in order to know whether you should stop what you're doing and do something else, you'll need to have to have a good sense of what your job requires and how that fits into the other contexts of your life.
On each of those projects you'll have things you need to do, as soon as you can do them (next actions).
If you make a complete list of all of the things you want to have happen in your life and work at this level, you'll discover that there are actions you need to do that you hadn't realized.
The operational purpose of the "Areas of Focus" list is to ensure that you have all your projects and next actions defined, so you can manage your responsibilities appropriately.
Even so, there are probably some things you can identify right now that can help you get current in your own thinking about your work and what's important in it.
If so, put that outcome on your "Projects" list, and decide the next action.
Most of the people who need those already have them, or at least have access to the training and software required to learn about them.
planning.
Most of the outcomes you have identified for your "Projects" list will not need any kind of front-end planning, other than the sort you do in your head, quickly and naturally, to come up with a next action on them.
Projects That Need Next Actions About Planning There are probably a few projects you can think of right now, off the top of your head, that you know you want to get more objectified, fleshed out, and under control.
If you haven't done it already, get a next action now that will start the planning process for each of these, and put it on the appropriate action list.
Brainstorming Some of the projects that have your attention right now will require you to do your own free-form thinking; this is especially true of those for which you were not clear about what PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO the next action would be when you made that decision.
If you have to be in your office to do that (because that's where the files are, and you don't want to carry them around), that action should go on your "At Office" action list.
Just as your "Next Actions" lists need to be up-to-date, so, too, does your "Projects" list.
You'll then most attention on or interest in right now and do be way ahead of some thinking and collecting and organizing on most people.
as next action?"
for yourself and those and focus.
"So what's the next action?"
That's about how much time is required to decide what the "doing" would look like on almost everything.
It's just the few seconds of focused thinking that most people have not yet done about most of their stuff.
Is "Get a tune-up" a next action?
"So, what's the next action?"
Most people have many things just like that on their lists.
So when do you think most people really make a lot of their next-action decisions about their stuff-when it shows up, or when it blows up?
But without a clear conclusion that there is a next action, much less what it is CHAPTER 12 | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION or who's got it, more often than not a lot of "stuff" gets left up in the air.
Get in-baskets.
