It's also becoming a critical operational style required of successful and high-performing professionals.
way you clarify and organize all the things that com- .
The methods I present here are all based on two key objectives:(1) capturing all the things that need to get donenow, later, someday, big, little, or in betweeninto a logical and trusted system outside of your head and off your mind; and (2) disciplining yourself to make front-end decisions about all of me "inputs" you THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE let into your life so that you will always have a plan for "next actions" that you can implement or renegotiate at any moment.
As you'll discover, the principles and methods are instantly usable and applicable to everything you have to do in your personal as well as your professional life.
In the course of a single recent week, I consulted with a partner in a major global investment firm who was concerned that the new corporate-management responsibilities he was being offered would stress his family commitments beyond the limits; and with a midlevel human-resources manager trying to stay on top of her 150-plus e-mail requests per day fueled by the goal of doubling the company's regional office staff from eleven hundred to two thousand people in one year, all as she tried to protect a social life for herself on the weekends.
A paradox has emerged in this new millennium: people have *I consider "work," in its most universal sense, as meaning anything that you want or need to be different than it currently is.
Many people make a distinction between "work" and "personal life," but I don't: to me, weeding the garden or updating my will is just as much "work" as writing this book or coaching a client.
CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY enhanced quality of life, but at the same time they are adding to their stress levels by taking on more than they have resources to handle.
Work No Longer Has Clear Boundaries A major factor in the mounting stress level is that the actual nature of our jobs has changed much more dra- Time is the matically and rapidly than have our training for and quality of nature our ability to deal with work.
Peter Drucker has so aptly termed "knowledge work."
Now, for many of us, there are no edges to most of our projects.
How effective could the training pro- infinite quantity of gram be, or the structure of your executives' compen- information is now available that could sation package?
And a last question: How much available data could be relevant to doing those projects "better"?
Many of today's organizational outcomes require cross-divisional communication, cooperation, and engagement.
Our individual office silos are crumbling, and with them is going the luxury of not having to read cc'd e-mails from the marketing department, or from human resources, or from some ad hoc, dealwith-a-certain-issue committee.
Our Jobs Keep Changing The disintegrating edges of our projects and our work in general would be challenging enough for anyone.
But now we must add to that equation the constantly shifting definition of our jobs.
I often ask in my seminars, "Which of you are doing only what you were hired to do?"
2 | The average professional is more of a free agent these days than ever before, changing careers as often as his or her parents once changed jobs.
Their aims are just more integrated into the mainstream now, covered by the catchall "professional, management, and executive development"which simply means they won't keep doing what they're doing for any extended period of time.
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY Little seems clear for very long anymore, as far as what our work is and what or how much input may be relevant to doing it well.
The Old Models and Habits Are Insufficient Neither our standard education, nor traditional time-management models, nor the plethora of organizing tools available, such as personal notebook planners, Microsoft Outlook, or Palm personal digital assistants (PDAs), has given us a viable means of meeting the new demands placed on us.
If you've tried to use any of these processes or tools, you've probably found them unable to accommodate the speed, complexity, and changing priority factors inherent in what you The winds and waves are always are doing.
The ability to be successful, relaxed, and in on the side of the control during these fertile but turbulent times ablest navigators.
The traditional approaches to time management and personal organization were useful in their time.
They provided helpful reference points for a workforce that was just emerging from an industrial assembly-line modality into a new kind of work that included choices about what to do and discretion about when to do it.
When "time" itself turned into a work factor, personal calendars became a key work tool.
(Even as late as the 1980s many professionals considered having a pocket Day-Timer the essence of being organized, and many people today think of their calendar as the central tool for being in control.)
"ABC" priority codes and daily "to-do" lists were key techniques THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE that people developed to help them sort through their choices in some meaningful way.
If you had the freedom to decide what to do, you also had the responsibility to make good choices, given your "priorities."
What you've probably discovered, at least at some level, is that a calendar, though important, can really effectively manage only a small portion of what you need to organize.
And daily to-do lists and simplified priority coding have proven inadequate to deal with the volume and variable nature of the average professional's workload.
More and more people's jobs are made up of dozens or even hundreds of e-mails a day, with no latitude left to ignore a single request, complaint, or order.
There are few people who can (or even should) expect to code everything an "A," a "B," or a "C" priority, or who can maintain some predetermined list of to-dos that the first telephone call or interruption from their boss won't totally undo.
In practice, however, the well-intentioned exercise of values thinking too often does not achieve its desired results.
I have seen too many of these efforts fail, for one or more of the following three reasons: 1 | There is too much distraction at the day-to-day, hour-tohour level of commitments to allow for appropriate focus on the higher levels.
2 | Ineffective personal organizational systems create huge subconscious resistance to undertaking even bigger projects and goals that will likely not be managed well, and that will in turn cause even more distraction and stress.
And what created much of the work that's on those lists in the first place?
There has been a missing piece in our new culture of knowledge work: a system with a coherent set of behaviors and tools that functions effectively at the level at which work really happens.
It must manage multiple tiers of priorities.
It must maintain control over hundreds of new inputs daily.
The Promise: The "Ready State" of the Martial Artist Reflect for a moment on what it actually might be like if your personal management situation were totally under control, at all levels and at all times.
It's a condition of working, doing, and being in which the mind is clear and constructive things are happening.
More and more it will be a required condition for high-performance professionals who wish to maintain balance and a consistent positive output in their work.
not muscle; it comes from a focused "pop" at the end Sbunryu Suzuki of the whip.
That's why petite people can learn to break boards and bricks with their hands: it doesn't take calluses or brute strength, just the ability to generate a focused thrust with speed.
Responding Anything that inappropriately to your e-mail, your staff, your proj- causes you to ects, your unread magazines, your thoughts about overreact or underreact can what you need to do, your children, or your boss will control you, and lead to less effective results than you'd like.
We were not stressed out; you were highly focused on can be completely what you were doing; time tended to disappear present.
And if you get seriously far out of that the opportunity stateand start to feel out of control, stressed before us.
out, unfocused, bored, and stuckdo you have the Mark ability to get yourself back into it?
The Principle: Dealing Effectively with Internal Commitments A basic truism I have discovered over twenty years of coaching and training is that most of the stress people experience comes from inappropriately managed commitments they make or accept.
Even those who are not consciously "stressed out" will invariably experience greater relaxation, better focus, and increased productive energy when they learn more effectively to control the "open loops" of their lives.
You've probably made many more agreements with yourself than you realize, and every single one of them-big or littleis being tracked by a less-than-conscious part of you.
Open loops can include everything from really big to-do items like "End world hunger" to the more modest "Hire new assistant" to the tiniest task such as "Replace electric pencil sharpener."
It's likely that you also have more internal commitments currently in play than you're aware of.
You not belong where it have a commitment, for instance, to deal in some is, the way it is, is way with every new communication landing in your an "open loop" e-mail, on your voice-mail, and in your in-basket.
pulling on your And surely there are numerous projects that you attention.
In order to deal effectively with all of that, you must first identify and collect all those things that are "ringing your bell" in some way, and then plan how to handle them.
Anything you consider unfinished in any way must be captured in a trusted system outside your mind, or what I call a collection bucket, that you know you'll come back to regularly and sort through.
Third, once you've decided on all the actions you need to take, you must keep reminders of them organized in a system you review regularly.
Now describe, in a single written sentence, your intended successful outcome for this problem or situation.
It could be as simple as "Take the Hawaii vacation," "Handle situation with customer X," "Resolve college situation with Susan," "Clarify new divisional management structure," or "Implement new investment strategy."
Go to your computer and write an e-mail?
If you're like the vast majority of people who complete that drill during my seminars, you'll be experiencing at Think like a man least a tiny bit of enhanced control, relaxation, and of action, act like a focus.
Imagine that motivation magnified a thousandfold, as a way to live and work.
What probably happened is that you acquired a clearer definition of the outcome desired and the next action required.
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY The Real Work of Knowledge Work Welcome to the real-life experience of "knowledge work," and a profound operational principle: You have to think about your stuff more than you realize but not as much as you're afraid you might.
As Peter Drucker has written, "In knowledge work .
the The ancestor of every action is a key question in making knowledge workers producthought.
And results have to be clearly specified, if productivity is to be achieved."
But in truth, outcome thinking is one of the most effective means available for making wishes reality.
Why Things Are on Your Mind Most often, the reason something is "on your mind" is that you want it to be different than it currently is, and yet:  you haven't clarified exactly what the intended outcome is;  you haven't decided what the very next physical action step is; and/or  you haven't put reminders of the outcome and the action required in a system you trust.
It will keep pressuring you about that untaken next step, usually when you can't do anything about it, which will just add to your stress.
And it only adds to your anxieties about what you should be doing and aren't.
CHAPTER 1 [ A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY It seems that most people let their minds run a lot of the show, especially where the too-much-to-do syndrome is concerned.
You've probably given over a lot of your Rule your mind or "stuff," a lot of your open loops, to an entity on your it will rule you.
The Transformation of "Stuff" Here's how I define "stuff": anything you have allowed into your psychological or physical world that doesn't belong where it is, but for which you haven't yet determined the desired outcome and the next action step.
The reason most organizing systems haven't worked for most people is that they haven't We need to yet transformed all the "stuff" they're trying to orga- transform all the "stuff" we're trying nize.
As long as it's still "stuff," it's not controllable.
Most of the to-do lists I have seen over the years to organize into (when people had them at all) were merely listings of actionable stuff we "stuff," not inventories of the resultant real work that need to do.
They were partial reminders of a lot of things that were unresolved and as yet untranslated into outcomes and actionsthat is, the real outlines and details of what the list-makers had to "do."
Things that command our attention, by their very nature, usually show up as "stuff."
But once "stuff" comes into our lives and work, we have an inherent commitment to ourselves to define and clarify its meaning.
That's our responsibility as knowledge workers; if "stuff" were already transformed and clear, our value, other than physical labor, would probably not be required.
At the conclusion of one of my seminars, a senior manager of a major biotech firm looked back at the to-do lists she had come in with and said, "Boy, that was an amorphous blob of undoability!"
That's the best description I've ever heard of what passes for organizing lists in most personal systems.
The vast majority of people have been trying to get organized by rearranging incomplete lists of THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE unclear things; they haven't yet realized how much and what they need to organize in order to get the real payoff.
They need to gather everything that requires thinking about and then do that thinking if their organizational efforts are to be successful.
The Process: Managing Action You can train yourself, almost like an athlete, to be faster, more responsive, more proactive, and more focused in knowledge work.
You can minimize the loose ends across the whole spectrum of your work life and personal life and get a lot more done with less effort.
And you can make frontend decision-making about all the "stuff" you collect and create standard operating procedure for living and working in this new millennium.
And the way to do that, as we've seen, is not by managing time, managing information, or managing priorities.
After all:  you don't manage five minutes and wind up with six;  you don't manage information overloadotherwise you'd walk into a library and die, or the first time you connected to the Web, or even opened a phone book, you'd blow up; and  you don't manage prioritiesyou have them.
Instead, the key to managing all of your "stuff" is managing your actions.
Managing Action Is the Prime Challenge What you do with your time, what you do with information, and what you do with your body and your focus relative to your CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR ANEW REALITY prioritiesthose are the real options to which you must allocate your limited resources.
The real issue is how we manage actions.
However, it might amaze you to discover how many next actions for how many projects and commitments remain undetermined by most people.
It's extremely difficult to manage actions you haven't The beginning identified or decided on.
Greek And the common complaint that "I don't have time to ____ " (fill in the blank) is understandable because many projects seem overwhelmingand are overwhelming because you can't do a project at all!
Many actions require only a minute or two, in the appropriate context, to move a project forward.
In training and coaching thousands of professionals, I have found that lack of time is not the major issue for them (though they themselves may think it is); the real problem is a lack of clarity and definition about what a project Things rarely get really is, and what the associated next-action steps stuck because of required are.
They get when they first appear on the radar, rather than on stuck because the the back end, after trouble has developed, allows doing of them has not been defined.
people to reap the benefits of managing action.
The Value of a Bottom-Up Approach I have discovered over the years the practical value of working on personal productivity improvement from the bottom up, starting with the most mundane, ground-floor level of current activity and commitments.
Intellectually, the most appropriate way ought to be to work from the top down, first uncovering personal and corporate missions, then defining critical objectives, and finally focusing on the details of implementation.
The trouble is, however, THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE that most people are so embroiled in commitments on a day-today level that their ability to focus successfully on the larger horizon is seriously impaired.
Getting current on and in control of what's in your in-basket and on your mind right now, and incorporating practices that can help you stay that way, will provide the best means of broadening your horizons.
A creative, buoyant energy will be unleashed that will better support your focus on new heights, and your confidence will increase to handle what that creativity produces.
An immediate sense of freedom, release, and inspiration naturally comes to people who roll up their sleeves and implement this process.
You'll be better equipped to undertake higher-focused thinking when your tools for handling the resulting actions for implementation are part of your ongoing operational style.
It is not day to clear the decks of their mundane "stuff" have enough to stare up spent the following evening having a stream of ideas the steps; we must and visions about their company and their future.
Horizontal and Vertical Action Management You need to control commitments, projects, and actions in two wayshorizontally and vertically.
You need a good system that can keep track of as many of them as possible, supply required information about them on demand, and allow you to shift your focus from one thing to the next quickly and easily.
"Vertical" control, in contrast, manages thinking up and down the track of individual topics and projects.
This is "project planning" in the broad sense.
It's focusing in on a single endeavor, situation, or person and fleshing out whatever ideas, details, priorities, and sequences of events may be required for you to handle it, at least for the moment.
Appropriate action management lets you feel comfortable and in control as you move through your broad spectrum of work and life, while appropriate project focusing gets you clear about and on track with the specifics needed.
As you'll discover, the individual behaviors described in this book are things you're already doing.
The big difference between what I do and what others do is that I capture and organize 100 percent of my "stuff" in and with objective tools at There is usually an inverse proportion between how much something is on your mind and how much it's getting done.
And that applies to everythinglittle or big, personal or professional, urgent or not.
If so, you have a reference point for what I'm talking about.
But if you made that kind of review a characteristic of your ongoing life- and work style, and you maintained it across all areas of your life (not just the most "urgent"), you'd be practicing the kind of "black belt" management style I'm describing.
That's an inefficient use of creative energy and a source of frustration and stress.
But there's a limit to how much unresolved "stuff" it can contain before it blows a fuse.
The short-term-memory part of your mindthe part that tends to hold all of the incomplete, undecided, and unorganized "stuff"functions much like RAM on a personal computer.
Your conscious mind, like the computer screen, is a focusing tool, not a storage place.
And as with RAM, there's limited capacity; there's only so much "stuff" you can store in there and still have that part of your brain function at a high level.
They're constantly distracted, their focus disturbed by their own internal mental overload.
Unless you wrote it down and put it in a trusted "bucket" that you know you'll review appropriately sometime soon, more than likely you worried about it.
Sally Kempton means that as soon as you tell yourself that you need to do something, and store it in your RAM, there's a part of you that thinks you should be doing that something all the time.
Everything you've told yourself you ought to do, it thinks you should be doing right now.
Frankly, as soon as you have two things to do stored in your RAM, you've generated personal failure, because you can't do them both at the same time.
This produces an all-pervasive stress factor whose source can't be pinpointed.
Most people have been in some version of this mental stress state so consistently, for so long, that they don't even know they're in it.
Can you get rid of that kind of stress?
Getting Control of Your Life: The Five Stages of Mastering Workflow THE CORE PROCESS I teach for mastering the art of relaxed and controlled knowledge work is a five-stage method for managing workflow.
We (1) collect things that command our attention; (2) process what they mean and what to do about them; and (3) organize the results, which we (4) review as options for what we choose to (5) do.
The knowledge This constitutes the management of the "horizontal" that we consider aspect of our livesincorporating everything that knowledge proves has our attention at any time.
The method is straightforward enough in princiWhat we now ple, and it is generally how we all go about our work in mean by any case, but in my experience most people can stand knowledge is significantly to improve their handling of each one of information in the five stages.
The quality of our workflow manageaction, ment is only as good as the weakest link in this fiveinformation phase chain, so all the links must be integrated focused on results.
Peter F. Drucker Most people have major leaks in their collection process.
Many have collected things but haven't processed or decided what action to take about them.
Others make good decisions about "stuff" in the moment but lose the value of that thinking because they don't efficiently organize the results.
Still others have good systems but don't review them consistently enough to keep them functional.
There are times when I want only to collect input and not decide what to do with it yet.
At other times I may just want to process my notes from a meeting.
Or I may have just returned from a big trip and need to distribute and organize what I collected and processed on the road.
Then there are times when I want to review the whole inventory of my work, or some portion of it.
And obviously a lot of my time is spent merely doing something that I need to get done.
I have discovered that one of the major reasons many people haven't had a lot of success with "getting organized" is simply that they have tried to do all five phases at one time.
Most, when they sit down to "make a list," are trying to collect the "most important things" in some order that reflects priorities and sequences, without setting out many (or any) real actions to take.
But if you don't decide what needs to be done about your secretary's birthday, because it's "not that important" right now, that open loop will take up energy and prevent you from having a totally effective, clear focus on what is important.
Collect It's important to know what needs to be collected and how to collect it most effectively so you can process it appropriately.
In order for your mind to let go of the lower-level task of trying to hang on THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE to everything, you have to know that you have truly captured everything that might represent something you have to do, and that at some point in the near future you will process and review all of it.
Gathering 100 Percent of the "Incompletes" In order to eliminate "holes in the bucket," you need to collect and gather together placeholders for or representations of all the things you consider incomplete in your worldthat is, anything personal or professional, big or little, of urgent or minor importance, that you think ought to be different than it currently is and that you have any level of internal commitment to changing.
Many of the things you have to do are being collected for you as you read this.
Mail is coming into your mailbox, memos are being routed to your in-basket, e-mail is being funneled into your computer, and messages are accumulating on your voice-mail.
But at the same time, you've been "collecting" things in your environment and in your psyche that don't belong where they are, the way they are, for all eternity.
Even though it may not be as obviously "in your face" as your e-mail, this "stuff" still requires some kind of resolutiona loop to be closed, something to be done.
Strategy ideas loitering on a legal pad in a stack on your credenza, "dead" gadgets in your desk drawers that need to be fixed or thrown away, and out-of-date magazines on your coffee table all fall into this category of "stuff."
And it certainly includes all pending and in-progress items, as well as those things on which you've done everything you're ever going to do except acknowledge that you're finished with them.
Then you must empty these containers regularly to ensure that they remain viable collection tools.
Basically, everything is already being collected, in the larger sense.
But we're talking here about making sure that everything you need is collected somewhere other than in your head.
The Collection Tools There are several types of tools, both low- and high-tech, that can be used to collect your incompletes.
The following can all serve as versions of an in-basket, capturing self-generated input as well as information coming from outside:  Physical in-basket  Paper-based note-taking devices  Electronic note-taking devices  Voice-recording devices  E-mail The Physical In-Basket The standard plastic, wood, leather, or wire tray is the most common tool for collecting paper-based materials and anything else physical that needs some sort of processing: mail, magazines, memos, notes, phone slips, receiptseven flashlights with dead batteries.
Writing Paper and Pads Loose-leaf notebooks, spiral binders, and steno and legal pads all work fine for collecting random ideas, input, things to do, and so on.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE Electronic Note-Taking Computers can be used to type in notes for processing later.
Handheld devices (personal digital assistants, or PDAs) and electronic legal pads can both be used to collect all kinds of input.
E-mail If you're wired to the rest of the world through e-mail, your software contains some sort of holding area for incoming messages and files, where they can be stored until they are viewed, read, and processed.
Pagers and telephones can capture this kind of input as well.
Higher-Tech Devices Now you can dictate into computers as well as hand-write into them.
My needed grocery item has been collected.
And as the organizing part of the action-management process is further digitized, "bread" will automatically be added to my electronic grocery list, and maybe even ordered and delivered.
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW Whether high-tech or low-tech, all of the tools described above serve as similar in-baskets, capturing potentially useful information, commitments, and agreements for action.
Most people do have collection devices of some sort, but usually they're more or less out of control.
Let's examine the three requirements to make the collection phase work: 1 | Every open loop must be in your collection system and out of your head.
2 | You must have as few collection buckets as you can get by with.
Get It All Out of Your Head If you're still trying to keep track of too many things in your RAM, you likely won't be motivated to use and empty your in-baskets with integrity.
It's like trying to play pinball on a machine that has big holes in the table, so the balls keep falling out: there's little motivation to keep playing the game.
These collection tools should become part of your life-style.
Keep them close by so no matter where you are you can collect a potentially valuable thought-think of them as being as indispensable as your toothbrush or your driver's license or your glasses.
Minimize the Number of Collection Buckets You should have as many in-baskets as you need and as few as you can get by with.
You need this function to be available to you in THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE every context, since things you'll want to capture may show up almost anywhere.
If you have too many collection zones, however, you won't be able to process them easily or consistently.
An excess of collection buckets is seldom a problem on the high-tech end; the real improvement opportunity for most people is on the low-tech side, primarily in the areas of note-taking and physical in-basket collection.
Written notes need to be corralled and processed instead of left lying embedded in stacks, notebooks, and drawers.
Paper materials need to be funneled into physical in-baskets instead of being scattered over myriad piles in all the available corners of your world.
Implementing standard tools for capturing Men of lofty genius ideas and input will become more and more critical when they are as your life and work become more sophisticated.
As doing the least you proceed in your career, for instance, you'll probawork are the most bly notice that your best ideas about work will not active.
The ability to leverage that  thinking with good collection devices th Leonar at hand is key to increased productivity.
Empty the Buckets Regularly The final success factor for collecting should be obvious: if you don't empty and process the "stuff" you've collected, your buckets aren't serving any function other than the storage of amorphous material.
Emptying the bucket does not mean that you have to finish what's in your voice-mail, e-mail, or in-basket; it just means you have to take it out of the container, decide what it is and what should be done with it, and, if it's still unfinished, organize it into your system.
Not emptying your in-basket is like having garbage cans that nobody ever dumps you just have to keep buying new ones to hold all your trash.
Too much "stuff" is left piled in in-baskets because of a lack of effective systems "downstream" from there.
The in-basket, especially for paper and e-mail, is the best that many people can do in terms of organizationat least they know that somewhere in there is a reminder of something they still have to do.
Unfortunately, that safety net is lost when the piles get out of control or the inventory of e-mails gets too extensive to be viewed on one screen.
When you master the next phase and know how to process your incompletes easily and rapidly, "in" can return to its original function.
Let's move on to how to get those in-baskets and e-mail systems empty without necessarily having to do the work now.
Process Teaching them the item-by-item thinking required to get their collection buckets empty is perhaps the most critical improvement I have made for virtually all the people I've worked with.
When the head of a major department in a global corporation had finished processing all her open items with me, she sat back in awe and told me that though she had been able to relax about what meetings to go to thanks to her trust in her calendar, she had never felt that same relief about all the many other aspects of her job, which we had just clarified together.
The actions and information she needed to be reminded of were now identified and entrusted to a concrete system.
What do you need to ask yourself (and answer) about each e-mail, voice-mail, memo, or self-generated idea that comes your way?
This is the component of action management that forms the basis for your personal organization.
Many people try to "get organized" but make the mistake of doing it with incomplete batches of "stuff."
You can't organize what's incomingyou can only collect it and process it.
Instead, you organize the actions you'll need to take based on the decisions you've made about what needs to be done.
The whole dealboth the processing and THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE WORKFLOW DIAGRAMPROCESSING CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW organizing phasesis captured in the center "trunk" of the decision-tree model shown here.
In later chapters, I'll coach you in significant detail through each element of the process.
For now, though, I suggest you select a to-do list or a pile of papers from your in-basket and assess a few items as we take an overview.
We've talked about "stuff."
And we've talked about collection buckets.
But we haven't discussed what stuff is and what to do about it.
For example, many of the items that tend to leak out of our personal organizing systems are amorphous forms that we receive from the government or from our companydo we actually need to do something about them?
And what about that e-mail from human resources, letting us know that blah-blah about the blah-blah is now the policy of blah-blah?
I've unearthed piles of messages in stacks and desk drawers that were tossed there because the client didn't take just a few seconds to figure out what in fact the communication or document was really about.
No Action Required If the answer is NO, there are three possibilities: 1 | It's trash, no longer needed.
3 | The item is potentially useful information that might be needed for something later (reference).
For now, suffice it to say that you need THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE a trash basket and <Del> key for trash, a "tickler" file or calendar for material that's incubating, and a good filing system for reference information.
Actionable This is the YES group of items, stuff about which something needs to be done.
Typical examples range from an e-mail requesting your participation in a corporate service project on such-and-such a date to the notes in your in-basket from your face-to-face meeting with the group vice president about a significant new project that involves hiring an outside consultant.
Two things need to be determined about each actionable item: 1 | What "project" or outcome have you committed to?
and 2 | What's the next action required?
This is the critical question for anything you've collected; if you answer it appropriately, you'll have the key substantive thing to organize.
The "next action" is the next physical, visible activity that needs to be engaged in, in order to move the current reality toward completion.
Some examples of next actions might be:  Call Fred re tel.
Research database-management software on the Web.
Reminders of these will become the primary grist for the mill of your personal productivity-management system.
Do It, Delegate It, or Defer It Once you've decided on the next action, you have three options: 1 | Do it.
If the action will take longer than two minutes, and you are the right person to do it, you will have to defer acting on it until later and track it on one or more "Next Actions" lists.
Organize The outer ring of the workflow diagram shows the eight discrete categories of reminders and materials that will result from your processing all your "stuff."
Together they make up a total system for organizing just about everything that's on your plate, or could be added to it, on a daily and weekly basis.
For nonactionable items, the possible categories are trash, incubation tools, and reference storage.
To manage actionable things, you will need a list of projects, storage or files for project plans and materials, a calendar, a list of reminders of next actions, and a list of reminders of things you're waiting for.
When I refer to "lists," I just mean some sort of reviewable set of reminders, which could be lists on THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE WORKFLOW DIAGRAMORGANIZING CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW notebook paper or in some computer program or even file folders holding separate pieces of paper for each item.
For instance, the list of current projects could be kept on a page in a Day Runner; it could be a "To Do" category on a PDA; or it could be in a file labeled "Projects List."
Incubating reminders (such as "after March 1 contact my accountant to set up a meeting") may be stored in a paper-based "tickler" file or in a paper- or computerbased calendar program.
This means that some rather small things that you might not normally call projects are going to be on your "Projects" list.
Update will Finalize budgets Finalize new product line Get comfortable with new contact- R&D joint-venture video project Produce new training compact disk Establish next year's seminar schedule Orchestrate a one-hour keynote presentation Get proficient with videoconferencing access Finalize employment agreements Install new backyard lights management software Get reprints of Fortune article Get a publicist Finish new orchard planting Establish formal relationships with South American rep Finalize staff policies and procedures Get a new living-room chair THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE Projects do not need to be listed in any particular order, whether by size or by priority.
They just need to be on a master list so you can review them regularly enough to ensure that appropriate next actions have been defined for each of them.
The list of projects is the compilation of finish lines we put before us, to keep our next actions moving on all tracks appropriately.
Project Support Material For many of your projects, you will accumulate relevant information that you will want to organize by theme or topic or project name.
All of the details, plans, and supporting information that you may need as you work on your various projects should be contained in separate file folders, computer files, notebooks, or binders.
Support Materials and Reference Files Once you have organized your project support material by theme or topic, you will probably find that it is almost identical to your reference material and could be kept in the same reference file system (a "Wedding" file could be kept in the general-reference files, for instance).
The only difference is that in the case of active projects, support material may need to be reviewed on a more consistent basis to ensure that all the necessary action steps are identified.
If you have a good working reference file system close enough at hand, you may find that that's the simplest way to organize them.
There will be times, though, when it'll be more convenient to have the materials out and instantly in view and available, especially if you're working on a hot project that you need to check references for several times during the day.
The Next-Action Categories As the Workflow Diagram makes clear, the next-action decision is central.
Any less-than-two-minute actions that you perform, and all other actions that have already been completed, do not, of course, need to be tracked; they're done.
What does need to be tracked is every action that has to happen at a specific time or on a specific day (enter these in your calendar); those that need to be done as soon as they can (add these to your "Next Actions" lists); and all those that you are waiting for others to do (put these on a "Waiting For" list).
Calendar Reminders of actions you need to take fall into two categories: those about things that have to happen on a specific day or time, and those about things that just need to get done as soon as possible.
Three things go on your calendar:  time-specific actions;  day-specific actions; and  day-specific information.
Often the next action to be taken on a project is attending a meeting that has been set up to discuss it.
It's useful to have a calendar on which you can note both timespecific and day-specific actions.
Day-Specific Information The calendar is also the place to keep track of things you want to know about on specific daysnot necessarily actions you'll have to take but rather information that may be useful on a certain date.
It's also helpful to put short-term "tickler" information here, too, such as a reminder to call someone after the day they return from a vacation.
I know this is heresy to traditional time-management training, which has almost uniBlessed are the versally taught that the "daily to-do list" is key.
But flexible, for they such lists don't work, for two reasons.
priorities reconfigure daily work so consistently that  it's virtually impossible to nail down to-do items Michael ahead of time.
Having a working game plan as a reference point is always useful, but it must be able to be renegotiated at any moment.
The "Next Actions" lists I advocate will hold all of those action reminders, even the most time-sensitive ones.
Second, if there's something on a daily to-do list that doesn't absolutely have to get done that day, it will dilute the emphasis on CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW the things that truly do.
If I have to call Mioko on Friday because that's the only day I can reach her, but then I add five other, less important or less time-sensitive calls to my to-do list, when the day gets crazy I may never call Mioko.
On "Next Actions" lists, which, along with the calendar, are at the heart of daily action-management organization.
"Call Jim Smith re budget meeting," "Phone Rachel and Laura's moms about sleepaway camp," and "Draft ideas re the annual sales conference" are all the kinds of action reminders that need to be kept in appropriate lists, or buckets, to be assessed as options for what we will do at any point in time.
If you have only twenty or thirty of these, it may be fine to keep them all on one list labeled "Next Actions," which you'll review whenever you have any free time.
make when you're at a phone or "Project Head QuesAlbert Einstein tions" to be asked at your weekly briefing.
Nonactionable Items You need well-organized, discrete systems to handle the items that require no action as well as the ones that do.
No-action systems fall into three categories: trash, incubation, and reference.
Throw away anything that has no potential future action or reference value.
If you leave this stuff mixed in with other categories, it will seriously undermine the system.
Incubation There are two other groups of things besides trash that require no immediate action, but this stuff you will want to keep.
Here again, it's critical that you separate nonactionable from actionable items; otherwise you will tend to go numb to your piles, stacks, and lists and not know where to start or what needs to be done.
Say you pick up something from a memo, or read an e-mail, that gives you an idea for a project you might want to do someday, but not now.
You'll want to be reminded of it again later so you can reassess the option of doing something about it in the future.
There are two kinds of "incubate" systems that could work for this kind of thing: "Someday/Maybe" lists and a "tickler" file.
This is the "parking lot" for projects that would be impossible to move on at present but that you don't want to forget about entirely.
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW Typical Partial "Someday/Maybe" List Get a bass-fishing boat Learn Spanish Take a watercolor class Create promotional videos of staff Find Stafford Lyons Get a digital video camera * Get a sideboard for the kitchen Build a lap pool Northern Italy trip Apprentice with my carpenter Get Kathryn a scooter Take a balloon ride Spotlight our artwork Build a koi pond Build a wine cellar Take a trip through Montana Digitize old photos and videos Have a neighborhood party Learn Photoshop software capabilities Set up a not-for-profit foundation Set up remote-server access at home You'll probably have some subcategories in your master "Someday/Maybe" list, such as  CDs I might want  Videos to rent  Books to read  Wine to taste  Weekend trips to take  Things to do with the kids  Seminars to take You must review this list periodically if you're going to get the most value from it.
"Tickler" File The most elegant version of holding for review is the "tickler" file, sometimes also referred to as a "suspended" or "follow-on" file.
Electronic storage can include everything from networked database information to ad hoc reference and archive folders located in your communication software.
The most important thing to remember here is that reference should be exactly thatinformation that can be easily referred to when required.
Reference systems generally take two forms: (1) topic- and area-specific storage, and (2) generalreference files.
General-Reference Filing The second type of reference system is one that everyone needs close at hand for storing ad hoc information that doesn't belong in some predesignated category.
The lack of a good general-reference file can be one of the biggest bottlenecks in implementing an efficient personal actionmanagement system.
If your reference material doesn't have a nice clean edge to it, the line between actionable and nonactionable items will blur, visually and psychologically, and your mind will go numb to the whole business.
Establishing a good working system for this category of material is critical to ensuring stress-free productivity; we will explore it in detail in chapter 7. Review It's one thing to write down that you need milk; it's another to be at the store and remember it.
You need to be able to review the whole picture of your life and work at appropriate intervals and appropriate levels.
For most people the magic of workflow management is realized in the consistent use of the review phase.
This is where you take a look at all your outstanding projects and open loops, at what I call the 10,000-foot level (see page 51), on a weekly basis.
It's your chance to scan all the defined actions and options before you, thus radically increasing the efficacy of the choices you make about what you're doing at any point in time.
What to Review When If you set up a personal organization system structured as I recommend, with a "Projects" list, a calendar, "Next Actions" lists, THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE and a "Waiting For" list, not much will be required to maintain that system.
The item you'll probably review most frequently is your calendar, which will remind you about the "hard landscape" for the daythat is, what things will die if you don't do them.
After checking your calendar, you'll most often Review your lists as turn to your "Next Actions" lists.
These hold the often as you need inventory of predefined actions that you can take if to, to get them off you have any discretionary time during the day.
you've organized them by context ("At Home," "At Computer," "In Meeting with George"), they'll come into play only when those contexts are available.
"Projects," "Waiting For," and "Someday/Maybe" lists need to be reviewed only as often as you think they have to be in order to stop you from wondering about them.
Critical Success Factor: The Weekly Review Everything that might potentially require action must be reviewed on a frequent enough basis to keep your mind from taking back the job of remembering and reminding.
In order to trust the rapid and intuitive judgment calls that you make about actions from moment to moment, you must consistently retrench at some more elevated level.
In my experience (with thousands of people), that translates into a behavior critical for success: the Weekly Review.
All of your open loops (i.e., projects), active project plans, and "Next Actions," "Agendas," "Waiting For," and even "Someday/ Maybe" lists should be reviewed once a week.
This also gives you CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW an opportunity to ensure that your brain is clear and that all the loose strands of the past few days have been collected, processed, and organized.
The Weekly Review is the time to The affairs of life embrace a multitude of interests, and he who reasons in any one of them, without consulting the rest, is a visionary unsuited to control the business of the world.
-James Fenim ore  Gather and process all your "stuff."
Update your lists.
Get clean, clear, current, and complete.
Cooper Most people don't have a really complete system, and they get no real payoff from reviewing things for just that reason: their overview isn't total.
That's why the rewards to be gained from implementing this whole process are at least geometric: the more complete the system is, the more you'll trust it.
Do this renegotiate all your agreements with yourself and weekly instead of others.
I just suggest that you do this weekly instead yearly.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE Do The basic purpose of this workflow-management process is to facilitate good choices about what you're doing at any Every decision to point in time.
At 10:33 A.M. Monday, deciding act is an intuitive whether to call Sandy, finish the proposal, or process one.
The challenge your e-mails will always be an intuitive call, but with is to migrate from the proper preplanning you can feel much more conhoping it's the right fident about your choices.
You can move from hope to choice to trusting trust in your actions, immediately increasing your it's the right choice.
Three Models for Making Action Choices Let's assume for a moment that you're not resisting any of your "stuff" out of insecurity or procrastination.
There will always be a large list of actions that you are not doing at any given moment.
If you have collected, processed, organized, and reviewed all your current commit- ments, you can galvanize your intuitive judgment with some intelligent and practical thinking about You have more to your work do than you can and values.
whether you call Frederick, e-mail your son at school, or just go have an informal "how are you?"
There are four criteria you can apply, in this order: | | | | Context Time available Energy available Priority Context A few actions can be done anywhere (like drafting ideas about a project with pen and paper), but most require a specific location (at home, at your office) or having some productivity tool at hand, such as a phone or a computer.
These are the first factors that limit your choices about what you can do in the moment.
Time Available When do you have to do something else} Having a meeting in five minutes would prevent doing many actions that require more time.
Some actions you have to do require a reservoir of fresh, creative mental energy.
Priority Given your context, time, and energy available, what action will give you the highest payoff?
Should you call the client back, work on the proposal, process your voice-mails and e-mails, or check in with your spouse to see how his or her day is going?
This is where you need to access your intution and begin to rely on your judgment call in the moment.
To explore that concept further, let's examine two more models for deciding what's "most important" for you to be doing.
The Threefold Model for Evaluating Daily Work When you're getting things done, or "working" in the universal sense, there are three different kinds of activities you can be engaged in:  Doing predefined work  Doing work as it shows up  Defining your work Doing Predefined Work When you're doing predefined work, you're working off your "Next Actions" listscompleting tasks that you have previously determined need to be done, managing your workflow.
For example, your partner walks into your office and wants to have a conversation about the new product launch, so you talk to her instead of doing all the other things you could be doing.
Defining Your Work Defining your work entails clearing up your in-basket, your e-mail, your voice-mail, and your meeting notes and breaking down new projects into actionable steps.
As you process your inputs, you'll no doubt be taking care of some lessthan-two-minute actions and tossing and filing numerous things (another version of doing work as it shows up).
You'll be adding to all of your lists as you go along.
Once you have defined all your work, you can trust that your lists of things to do are complete.
And your context, time, and energy available still allow you the option of more than one thing to do.
The Six-Level Model for Reviewing Your Own Work Priorities should drive your choices, but most models for determining them are not reliable tools for much of our real work activity.
In order to know what your priorities are, you have to know what your work is.
50,000+ feet: Life  40,000 feet: Three- to five-year vision  30,000 feet: One- to two-year goals  20,000 feet: Areas of responsibility  10,000 feet: Current projects  Runway: Current actions Let's start from the bottom up: Runway: Current Actions This is the accumulated list of all the actions you need to takeall the phone calls you have to make, the e-mails you have to respond to, the errands you've got to run, and the agendas you want to communicate to your boss and your spouse.
10,000 Feet: Current Projects Creating many of the actions that you currently have in front of you are the thirty to one hundred THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE projects on your plate.
These are the relatively short-term outcomes you want to achieve, such as setting up a home computer, organizing a sales conference, moving to a new headquarters, and getting a dentist.
20,000 Feet: Areas of Responsibility You create or accept most of your projects because of your responsibilities, which for most people can be defined in ten to fifteen categories.
Your job may entail at least implicit commitments for things like strategic planning, administrative support, staff development, market research, customer service, or asset management.
And your personal life has an equal number of such focus arenas: health, family, finances, home environment, spirituality, recreation, etc.
Listing and reviewing these responsibilities gives a more comprehensive framework for evaluating your inventory of projects.
30,000 Feet: One- to Two-Year Goals What you want to be experiencing in the various areas of your life and work one to two years from now will add another dimension to defining your work.
Often meeting the goals and objectives of your job will require a shift in emphasis of your job focus, with new areas of responsibility emerging.
At this horizon personally, too, there probably are things you'd like to accomplish or have in place, which could add importance to certain aspects of your life and diminish others.
The primary purpose for anything provides the core definition of what its "work" really is.
All the goals, visions, objectives, projects, and actions derive from this, and lead toward it.
These altitude analogies are somewhat arbitrary, and in real life the important conversations you will have about your focus and your priorities may not fit exactly to one horizon or another.
"Setting priorities" in the traditional sense of focusing on your long-term goals and values, though obviously a necessary core focus, does not provide a practical framework for a vast majority of the decisions and tasks you must engage in day to day.
Part 2 of this book will provide specific coaching about how to use these three models for making action choices, and how the best practices for collecting, processing, planning, organizing, and reviewing all contribute to your greatest success with them.
Getting Projects Creatively Under Way: The Five Phases of Project Planning You've got to think about the big things while you're doing small things, so that all the small things go in the right direction.
Alvin Toffler THE KEY INGREDIENTS of relaxed control are (1) clearly defined outcomes (projects) and the next actions required to move them toward closure, and (2) reminders placed in a trusted system that is reviewed regularly.
This is what I call horizontal focus.
Although it may seem simple, the actual application of the process can create profound results.
Enhancing "Vertical" Focus Horizontal focus is all you'll need in most situations, most of the time.
Sometimes, however, you may need greater rigor and focus to get a project under control, to identify a solution, The goal is to get or to ensure that all the right steps have been deterprojects and mined.
This is where vertical focus comes in.
needed for knowledge work.
Most of the thinking you'll need to do is informal, what I call back-of-the-envelope planningthe kind of thing you do literally on the back of an envelope in a coffee shop with a colleague as you're hashing out the agenda and structure of CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING a sales presentation.
In my experience this tends to be the most productive kind of planning you can do in terms of your output relative to the energy you put into it.
True, every once in a while you may need to develop a more formal structure or plan to clarify components, sequences, or priorities.
And more detailed outlines will also be necessary to coordinate more complex situationsif teams need to collaborate about various project pieces, for example, or if business plans need to be drafted to convince an investor you know what you're doing.
The greatest need I've seen in project thinking in the professional world is not for more formal models; usually the people who need those models already have them or can get them as part of an academic or professional curriculum.
Instead, I've found the biggest gap to be the lack of a project-focusing model for "the rest of us."
We need ways to validate and support our thinking, no matter how informal.
Formal planning sessions and highhorsepower planning tools (such as project software) can certainly be useful, but too often the participants in a meeting will need to have another meetinga back-of-the-envelope sessionto actually get a piece of work fleshed out and under control.
The good news is, there is a productive way to think about projects, situations, and topics that creates maximum value with minimal expenditure of time and effort.
In my experience, when people do more planning, more THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE informally and naturally, they relieve a great deal of stress and obtain better results.
You yourself are actually a planning machine.
You're planning when you get dressed, eat The most lunch, go to the store, or simply talk.
Although the experienced planner process may seem somewhat random, a quite comin the world is your plex series of steps in fact has to occur before your brain.
Your mind goes through five steps to accomplish virtually any task: | | | | | Defining purpose and principles Outcome visioning Brainstorming Organizing Identifying next actions A Simple Example: Planning Dinner Out The last time you went out to dinner, what initially caused you to think about doing it?
As soon as any of these turned into a real inclination that you wanted to move on, you started planning.
Your intention was your purpose, and it automatically triggered your internal planning process.
In any case, your purpose and principles were the defining impetus and boundaries of your planning.
That was your outcome visioning.
Whereas your purpose was the why of your going out to dinner, your vision was an image of the whatof the physical world's looking, sounding, and feeling the ways that best fulfilled your purpose.
Once you'd identified with your vision, what did your mind naturally begin doing?
Those questions were part of the naturally creative process that happens once you commit to some outcome that hasn't happened yet.
This is the beginning of the "how" phase of natural planning.
You almost certainly didn't need to actually write all of them down on a piece of paper, but you did a version of that process in your mind.
* Once you had generated a sufficient number of ideas and details, you couldn't help but start to organize them.
Once you've generated various thoughts relevant to the outcome, your mind will automatically begin to sort them by components (subprojects), priorities, and/or sequences of events.
Finally (assuming that you're really committed to the project in this case, going out to dinner), you focus on the next action that you need to take to make the first component actually happen.
These five phases of project planning occur naturally for everything you accomplish during the day.
Natural Planning Is Not Necessarily Normal But is the process described above the way your committee is planning the church retreat?
Is it how you're organizing the wedding or thinking through the potential merger?
And have you agreed on the standards and behaviors you'll need to adhere to to make it successful?
Have you Have you envisioned success and considered envisioned wild all the innovative things that might result if you success lately?
Have you defined all the aspects of the project that could be moved on right now, what the next action is for each part, and who's responsible for what?
If you're like most people I interact with in a coaching or consulting capacity, the collective answer to these questions is, probably not.
There are likely to be at least some components of the natural planning model that you haven't implemented.
In some of my seminars I get participants to actually plan a current strategic project that uses this model.
I just finished a business plan I've been telling myself would take months, and now I have no excuses for not doing it!"
Think of what a successful outcome would look like: where would you be physically, financially, in terms of reputation, or whatever?
Decide on the next actions.
The Unnatural Planning Model To emphasize the importance of utilizing the natural planning model for the more complex things we're involved with, let's contrast it with the more "normal" model used in most environments what I call unnatural planning.
Before any evaluation of what's a "good idea" can be trusted, the purpose must be clear, the vision must be well defined, and all the If you're waiting to relevant data must have been collected (brainhave a good idea stormed) and analyzed (organized).
People do it all the time, but it almost always engenders a lack of clarity and increased stress.
In interactions with others, it opens the door for egos, politics, and hidden agendas to take over the discussion (generally speaking, the most verbally aggressive will run the show).
And if it's just you, attempting to come up with a "good idea" before defining your purpose, creating a vision, and collecting lots of initial bad ideas is likely to give you a case of creative constipation.
Let's Blame Mrs. Williams If you're like most people in our culture, the only formal training you've ever had in planning and organizing proactively was in the fourth or fifth grade.
Mrs. Williams, my fourth-grade teacher, had to teach us about organizing our thinking (it was in her Outlines were easy, lesson plans).
as long as you But in order to write a well-organized, successful wrote the report report, what did we have to write first?
Did you ever stare at a Roman numeral I at the top of your page for a torturous period of time and decide that planning and organizing ahead of time were for people very different from you?
That's what most people learned about planning from our educational system.
But they still have very little to do with what people are doing or what they're inspired about.
These documents are sitting in drawers and in e-mails somewhere, bearing little relationship to operational reality.
The Reactive Planning Model The unnatural planning model is what most people consciously think of as "planning," and because it's so often artificial and irrelevant to real work, people just don't plan.
At least not on the front end: they resist planning meetings, presentations, and strategic operations until the last minute.
Will reactive planning model ensues.
What's the first level of focus when the stuff hits the fan?
And a lot of stressed-out people are thrown at the situation.
Then, when having a lot of busy people banging into each other doesn't resolve the situation, someone gets more THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE sophisticated and says, "We need to get organized!"
At some point they realize that just redrawing Don't just do boxes isn't really doing much to solve the problem.
(vision,purpose).
The reactive style is the reverse of the natural model.
It will always come back to a top-down focus.
It's not a matter of whether the natural planning will be donejust when, and at what cost.
Natural Planning Techniques: The Five Phases It goes without saying, but still it must be said again: thinking in more effective ways about projects and situations can make things happen sooner, better, and more successfully.
Let's examine each of the five phases of natural planning and see how we can leverage these contexts.
Almost anything you're currently doing can be enhanced and even galvanized by more CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING scrutiny at this top level of focus.
When they ask, "Who should I invite to the planning session?"
I have to ask, "What's the purpose of the planning session?"
":  It defines success.
It clarifies focus.
If you're not totally clear about the purpose of what you're doing, you have no chance of winning.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE Celebrate any about the purpose of what you're doing, you have no progress.
Purpose defines success.
It's the primal reference point for any investment of time and energy, from deciding to run for elective office to designing a form.
You won't really know whether or not your business plan is any good until you hold it up against the success criterion that you define by answering the question "Why do we need a business plan?"
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING It Motivates Let's face it: if there's no good reason to be doing something, it's not worth doing.
I'm often stunned by how many people have forgotten why they're doing what they're doingand by how quickly a simple question like "Why are you doing that?"
It Clarifies Focus When you land on the real purpose for anything you're doing, it makes things clearer.
Just taking two minutes and writing out your primary reason for doing something invariably creates an increased sharpness of vision, much like bringing a telescope into focus.
Frequently, projects and situations that have begun to feel scattered and blurred grow clearer when someone brings it back home by asking, "What are we really trying to accomplish here?"
It Expands Options Paradoxically, even as purpose brings things into pinpoint focus, it opens up creative thinking about wider possibilities.
When you really know the underlying "why"for the conference, for the staff party, for the If you're not sure elimination of the management position, or for the why you're doing mergerit expands your thinking about how to something, you can never do enough make the desired result happen.
out their purpose for a project in my seminars, they often claim it's like a fresh breeze blowing through their mind, clarifying their vision of what they're doing.
If you're truly experiencing the benefits of a purpose focusmotivation, clarity, decision-making criteria, alignment, and creativitythen your purpose probably is specific enough.
And if they are violated, the result will inevitably be unproductive distraction and stress.
A great way to think about what your principles Simple, clear are is to complete this sentence: "I would give others purpose and totally free rein to do this as long as they.
rules and It can be a major source of stress when others regulations give engage in or allow behavior that's outside your stanrise to simple and dards.
You may want to begin by asking yourself, "What behavior might undermine what I'm doing, and how can I prevent it?"
Another great reason for focusing on principles is the clarity and reference point they provide for positive conduct.
How do you want or need to work with others on this project to ensure its success?
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING Vision/Outcome In order most productively to access the conscious and unconscious resources available to you, you must have a clear picture in your mind of what success would look, sound, and feel like.
Purpose and principles furnish the impetus and the monitoring, but vision provides the actual blueprint of the final result.
What will this project or situation really be like when it successfully appears in the world?
For example, graduates of your seminar are demonstrating consistently applied knowledge of the subject matter.
The Power of Focus Since the 1960s thousands of books have expounded on the value of appropriate positive imagery and focus.
Forward-looking focus has even been a key element in Olympic-level sports training, with athletes imagining the physical effort, the positive energy, and the successful result to ensure the highest level of unconscious support for their performance.
We know that the focus we hold in our minds Imagination is affects what we perceive and how we perform.
This is more important as true on the golf course as it is in a staff meeting or than knowledge.
My Albert Einstein interest lies in providing a model for focus that is dynamic in a practical way, especially in project thinking.
When you focus on somethingthe vacation you're going to take, the meeting you're about to go into, the product you want to launchthat focus instantly creates ideas and thought patterns you wouldn't have had otherwise.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE The Reticular Activating System The May 1957 issue of Scientific American contained an article describing the discovery of the reticular formation at the base of the brain.
That focus on and, more primarily, what we identify with.
Once matches our internal belief systems and identified you give it a contexts.
If you focus automatic guidance system to take you on the color red right now and then just glance to that goal much around your environment, if there is any red at all, you'll see even the tiniest bits of it.
Suffice it to goal by thinking in say that something automatic and extraordinary hapterms of end pens in your mind when you create and focus on a results.
Maxwell Maltz filters work: you won't see how to do it until you see yourself doing it.
It's easy to envision something happening if it has happened before or you have had experience with similar successes.
It can be CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING quite a challenge, however, to identify with images of You often need to success if they represent new and foreign territory make it up in your that is, if you have few reference points about what mind before you an event might actually look like and little experience can make it happen in your life.
One of the most powerful skills in the world of knowledge work, and one of the most important to hone and develop, is creating clear outcomes.
Outcome/vision can range from a simple statement of the project, such as "Finalize computer-system implementation," to a completely scripted movie depicting the future scene in all its glorious detail.
Here are three basic steps for developing a vision: 1 | View the project from beyond the completion date.
2 | Envision "WILD SUCCESS"!
When I get people to focus on a successful scenario of their project, they usually experience heightened enthusiasm and think THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE of something unique and positive about it that hadn't occurred to them before.
When you identify with some picture in your mind that is different from your current reality, you automatically start filling in the gaps, or brainstorming.
This process usually goes on internally for most people about most things, and that's often sufficient.
Capturing Your Ideas Over the last few decades, a number of graphics-oriented brainstorming techniques have been introduced to help develop creative thinking about projects and topics.
Although the authors of these various processes may portray them as being different from one another, for most of us end-users the basic premise remains the same: give yourself permission to capture and express any idea, and then later on figure out how it fits in and what to do with it.
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING The most popular of these techniques is called mindmapping, a name coined by Tony Buzan, a British researcher in brain functioning, to label this process of brainstorming ideas onto a graphic format.
For instance, if I found out that I had to move my office, I might think about computers, changing my business cards, all the connections I'd have to change, new furniture, moving the phones, purging and packing, and so on.
If I captured these thoughts graphically it might start to look something like this: THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE You could do this kind of mind-mapping on Post-its that could be stuck on a whiteboard, or you could input ideas into a word processor or outlining program on the computer.
But if you're actually doing something with the ideaseven if it's just recording them for later evaluationthen here, have a bunch!
Psychologists are beginning to label this and similar processes "distributed cognition."
It's getting things out of your head and into objective, reviewable formats.
Then, when you get ready to organize your thinking, just spread them all out on the floor, see the structure, and figure out what you're missing."
Mr. Edmundson was teaching me a major piece of the natural Only he who planning model!
handles his ideas Few people can hold their focus on a topic for lightly is master of more than a couple of minutes, without some objechis ideas, and only tive structure and tool or trigger to help them.
That's why good thinking can happen while you're working on a computer document about a project, mind-mapping it on a legal pad of on a paper tablecloth in a hip restaurant, or just having a meeting about it with other people in a room that allows you to hold the context (a whiteboard with nice wet markers really helps there, too).
Brainstorming Keys Many techniques can be used to facilitate brainstorming and outof-the-box thinking.
Don't Judge, Challenge, Evaluate, or Criticize It's easy for the unnatural planning model to rear its ugly head in brainstorming, making people jump to premature evaluations and critiques of ideas.
If you care even slightly about what A good way to find out what something a critic thinks, you'll censure your expressive process as you look for the "right" thing to say.
There's a very might be is to uncover ail the subtle distinction between keeping brainstorming on things it's probably target with the topic and stifling the creative process.
It's also important that brainstorming be put into the overall context of the planning process, because if you think you're doing it just for its own sake, it can seem trite and inappropriately off course.
If you can understand it instead as something you're doing right now, for a certain period, before you move toward a resolution at the end, you'll feel more comfortable giving this part of the process its due.
The greater the volume of thoughts you have to work with, the better the context you can create for developing options and trusting your choices.
Put Analysis and Organization in the Background Analysis and evaluation and organization of your thoughts should be given as free a rein as creative out-of-the-box thinking.
Making a list can be a creative thing to do, a way to consider the people who should be on your team, the customer requirements for the software, or the components of the business plan.
Just make sure to grab all that and keep going until you get into the weeding and organizing of focus that make up the next stage.
Organizing usually happens when you identify components and subcomponents, sequences or events, and/or priorities.
What is the most important element to ensure the success of the project?
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY:.THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING This is the stage in which you can make good use of structuring tools ranging from informal bullet points, scribbled literally on the back of an envelope, to project-planning software like Microsoft Project.
Sort by (one or more):  components  sequences  priorities  Detail to the required degree.
I have never seen any two projects that needed to have exactly the same amount of structure and detail developed in order to get things off people's minds and moving successfully.
But almost all projects can use some form of creative thinking from the left side of the brain, along the lines of "What's the plan?"
Next Actions The final stage of planning comes down to decisions about the allocation and reallocation of physical resources to actually get THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE  the project moving.
The question to ask here is, "What's the next action?"
As we noted in the previous chapter, this kind of grounded, reality-based thinking, combined with clarification of the desired outcome, forms the critical component of knowledge work.
In my experience, creating a list of what your real projects are and consistently managing your next action for each one will constitute 90 percent of what is generally thought of as project planning.
This "runway level" approach will make you "honest" about all kinds of things: Are you really serious about doing this?
At some point, if the project is an actionable one, this nextaction decision must be made.
If you're not yet ready to answer that question, you have more to flesh out at some prior level in the natural planning sequence.
The Basics  Decide on next actions for each of the current moving parts of the project.
Decide on the next action in the planning process, if necessary.
Activating the "Moving Parts" A project is sufficiently planned for implementation when every next-action step has been decided on every front that can actually be moved on without some other component's having to be completed first.
If the project has multiple components, each of them should be assessed appropriately by asking, "Is there something that anyone could be doing on this right now?"
You could be coordinating speakers for the confer*You can also plan nonactionable projects and not need a next actionfor example, designing your dream house.
The lack of a next action by default makes it a "someday/maybe" project.
So there may be only one next action, which will be the linchpin for all the rest.
What if there's still more planning to be done before you can feel comfortable with what's next?
There's still an action stepit is just a process action.
What's the next step in the continuation of planning?
Telling your assistant to set up a planning meeting with the product team.
The habit of clarifying the next action on projects, no matter what the situation, is fundamental to you staying in relaxed control.
If the next action is not yours, you must nevertheless clarify whose it is (this is a primary use of the "Waiting For" action list).
In a group-planning situation, it isn't necessary for everyone to know what the next step is on every part of the project.
Often all that's required is to allocate responsibility for parts of the project to the appropriate persons and leave it up to them to identify next actions on their particular pieces.
This next-action conversation forces organizational clarity.
How much of this planning model do you really need to flesh out, and to what degree of detail?
Most projects, given my definition of a project as an outcome requiring more than one action, need no more than a listing of their outcome and next action for you to get If the project is still them off your mind.
You planning to do.
I estimate that 80 percent of projects are of that nature.
You'll still be doing the full planning model on all of them, but only in your head, and just enough to figure out next actions and keep them going until they're complete.
Another 15 percent or so of projects might require at least some external form of brainstormingmaybe a mind-map or a few notes in a word processor or PowerPoint file.
That might be sufficient for planning meeting agendas, your vacation, or a speech to the local chamber of commerce.
A final 5 percent of projects might need the deliberate application of one or more of the five phases of the natural planning model.
Are you aware of a need for greater clarity, or greater action, on any of your projects?
If greater clarity is what you need, shift your thinking up the natural planning scale.
They need to pull out their plan, or create one {organize).
If there's CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING a lack of clarity at the planning level, there's probably a need for more brainstorming to generate a sufficient inventory of ideas to create trust in the plan.
If the brainstorming session gets bogged down with fuzzy thinking, the focus should shift back to the vision of the outcome, ensuring that the reticular filter in the brain will open up to deliver the best how-to thinking.
If the outcome/ vision is unclear, you must return to a clean analysis of why you're engaged in the situation in the first place {purpose).
The thinking must go to the specifics  of the vision.
I often have clients who have inherited a relatively clearly articulated project, like "Implement the new performancereview system," but who aren't moving forward because they haven't yet taken a few minutes to dump some ideas out about what that might entail.
If brainstorming gets hung up (and very often it does for more "blue sky" types), rigor may be required to do some evaluation of and decision-making about mission-critical deliverables that have to be handled {organizing).
This is sometimes the case when an informal back-and-forth meeting that has generated lots of ideas ends without producing any decision about what actually needs to happen next on the project.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE And if there is a plan, but the rubber still isn't hitting the road like it should, someone needs to assess each component with the focus of "What's the next action, and who's got it?"
One manager, who had taken over responsibility many months in advance for organizing a major annual conference, asked me how to prevent the crisis all-nighters her team had experienced near the deadline the previous year.
After identifying half a dozen, we clarified the next action on each one.
In the last two chapters, I have covered the basic models of how to stay maximally productive and in control, with minimal effort, at the two most basic levels of our life and work: the actions we take and the projects we enter into that generate many of those actions.
The fundamentals remain trueyou must be You need no new responsible for collecting all your open loops, applyskills to increase ing a front-end thought process to each of them, and your productivity- managing the results with organization, review, and just a new set of action.
ning process that goes on to get you from here to there.
You need essentially no new skillsyou already know how to write things down, clarify outcomes, decide next actions, put things into categories, review it all, and make intuitive choices.
Right now you have the ability to focus on successful results, brainstorm, organize your thinking, and get moving on your next steps.
Sometimes just one good trick can make it worthwhile to range It is easier to act through this information: I've had people tell me, for yourself into a example, that the best thing they got from my two- better way of feeling than to feel day seminar was advice on setting up and using a yourself into a tickler file.
We trick ourselves into doing what we ought to be doing.
If I put on exercise gear, I'll start to feel like exercising; if I don't, I'm very likely to feel like doing something else.
Let's look at an example of a real productivity trick.
If you were to take out your calendar right now and look closely at every single item for the next fourteen days, you'd probably come up with at least one "OhYou increase your productivity that-reminds-me-I-need-to_____________ ."
If you and creativity then capexponentially when tured that value-added thought into some place that you think about the would trigger you to act, you'd feel better already, right things at the have a clearer head, and get more positive things right time and have done.
three minutes focus solely on the most awesome project on your mind, I guarantee you'll have at least one CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLS "Oh, yeah, I need to consider __ ."
If you're sincere about making a major leap forward in your personal management systems, I recommend that you pay close attention to the details and follow through on the suggestions provided below in their entirety.
Setting Aside the Time I recommend that you create a block of time to initialize this process and prepare a workstation with the appropriate space, furniture, and tools.
If your space is properly set up and streamlined, it can reduce your unconscious resistance to dealing with your stuff and even make it attractive for you to sit down and crank through your input and your work.
(Don't be put off by that if you don't have that long to spend, though: doing any of the activities I suggest will be useful, no matter how much or how little time you devote to them.
Implementing the full collection process can PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO take up to six hours or more, and processing and deciding on actions for all the input you'll want to externalize and capture into your system can easily take another eight hours.
Of course you can also collect and process your stuff in chunks, but it'll be much easier if you can tackle that front-end portion in one fell swoop.
The ideal time for me to work with a professional is on a weekend or holiday because the chance of outside disturbance is minimal then.
If I work with someone on a typical workday, we first make sure that no meetings are scheduled and only emergency interruptions are allowed; phone calls are routed to voicemail, or logged by secretaries for review and handling during a break.
* For many of the executives I work with, holding the world back for two contiguous days is the hardest part of the whole process the perceived necessity to be constantly available for meetings and communications when they're "at work" is difficult for them to let go of.
It's not that the procedure itself is so "sacred"; it's just that it takes a lot of psychic energy to collect and process Dedicate two days such a large inventory of open loops, especially when to this process, and they've been "open," "undecided," or "stuck" for way it will be worth too long.
If you can get to ground terms of your zero in one contained time period, it gives you a huge productivity and sense of control and accomplishment and frees up a mental health.
Later on you can *After hours is actually a good time to crank through a group of similar tasks that you wouldn't normally do in the course of your typical workday, like filing a big backlog of papers, organizing photographs, surfing the Web about your upcoming vacation location, or processing expense receipts.
The writing surface will of course expand for most professionals, to include a phone, a computer, stacking trays, working file drawers, reference shelves.
As you'll discover through this process, it's critical that you have at least a satellite home PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO You must have a focused work space at home, at work, and if possible even in system identical to the one in your office.
If you're like many of them, you'll find that a weekend spent setting up a home workstation can make a revolutionary change in your ability to organize your life.
An Office Space in Transit If you move around much, as a business traveler or just as a person with a mobile life-style, you'll also want to set up an efficiently organized micro-office-in-transit.
The combination of a good processing style, the right tools, and good interconnected systems at home and at work can make traveling a highly leveraged way to get certain kinds of work done.
It is imperative that you have your own work spaceor at least your own in-basket and a physical place in which to process paper.
Far from being the "separation" they expect, the move in fact relieves them of a subtle stress in their relationship about managing the stuff of their shared lives.
One couple even decided to set up an additional mini-workstation in the kitchen for the stay-at-home mom, so she could process work while keeping an eye on their infant in the family room.
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLS Some organizations are interested in the concept of "hoteling"that is, having people create totally self-contained and mobile workstation capabilities so they can "plug in" anywhere in the company, at any time, and work from there.
A friend who was involved in setting up an "office of the future" model in Washington, D.C., for the U.S. government, claimed that hoteling tended to fall apart because of the "Mine!"
factorpeople wanted their own stuff.
Having to continually reinvent our inbasket, our filing system, and how and where we process our stuff can only be a source of incessant distraction.
It is critical that you You can work virtually everywhere if you have a clean, compact system and know how to process your have your own work space.
You stuff rapidly and portably.
But you'll still need a want to use your "home base" with a well-grooved set of tools and sufficient space for all the reference and support systems, not just think about them.
Most people I work with need at least four file drawers for their general-reference and projectsupport types of paper-based materialsand it's hard to imagine that all of that could ever be totally and easily movable.
Getting the Tools You'll Need If you're committed to a full implementation of this workflow process, there are some basic supplies and equipment that you'll need to get you started.
In addition to a desktop work space, you'll need:  Paper-holding trays (at least three)  A stack of plain letter-size paper  A pen/pencil Post-its (3X3s)  Paper clips  Binder clips  A stapler and staples  Scotch tape  Rubber bands  An automatic labeler  File folders  A calendar  Wastebasket/recycling bins Paper-Holding Trays These will serve as your in-basket and out-basket, with one or two others for work-in-progress support papers and/or your "read and review" stack.
Plain Paper You'll use plain paper for the initial collection process.
Although most people will wind up processing their notes into some sort of list organizer, a few will actually stick with the simple piece-of-paper-per-thought system.
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLS Moment-to-moment collecting, thinking, Post-its, clips, stapler, tape, and rubber bands will processing, and come in handy for routing and storing paper-based organizing are materials.
), and the simple tools for managing always ensure that it are essential.
The Labeler Post-its, Clips, Stapler, Etc.
Thousands of executives and professionals and homemakers I have worked with now have their own automatic labelers, and my archives are full of their comments, like, "IncredibleI wouldn't have believed what a difference it makes!"
You can get software and printer sheets to make computergenerated labels, but I prefer the stand-alone tool.
If you have to wait to do your filing or labeling as a batch job, you'll most likely resist making files for single pieces of paper, and it'll add the formality factor, which really puts the brakes on this system.
Your generalreference filing system should just be a simple library.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Calendar Although you may not need a calendar just to collect your incomplete items, you'll certainly come up with actions that need to be put there, too.
As I noted earlier, the calendar should be used not to hold action lists but to track the "hard landscape" of things that have to get done on a specific day or at a specific time.
Most professionals these days already have some sort of working calendar system in place, ranging from pocket week-ata-glance booklets, to loose-leaf organizers with day-, week-, month-, and year-at-a-glance options, to single-user software organizers, to group-ware calendars used companywide, like Outlook or Lotus Notes.
The calendar has often been the central tool that people rely on to "get organized."
After you develop a feel for the whole systematic approach, you'll have a better reference point for deciding about graduating to a different tool.
Wastebasket/Recycling Bins If you're like most people, you're going to toss a lot more stuff than you expect, so get ready to create a good bit of trash.
Whether or not you'll need an organizer will depend on a number of factors.
How do you want to see your reminders of actions, agendas, and projects?
Where and how often might you need to review them?
You could maintain everything in a to process your purely low-tech fashion, by keeping pieces of paper stuff and what to in folders.
Or you could even use a paper-based note- organize, you really book or planner, or a digital version thereof.
Or you just need to create and manage lists.
All of the low-tech gear listed in the previous section is used for various aspects of collecting, processing, and organizing.
You'll use a tray and random paper for collecting.
As you process your in-basket, you'll complete many less-than-twominute actions that will require Post-its, a stapler, and paper clips.
What's leftmaintaining a project inventory, logging calendar items and action and agenda reminders, and tracking the things you're waiting for will require some form of lists, or reviewable groupings of similar items.
Lists can be managed simply in a low-tech way, as pieces of paper kept in a file folder (e.g., separate sheets/notes for each person you need to call in a "Calls" file), or they can be arranged in a more "mid-tech" fashion, in loose-leaf notebooks or planners (a page titled "Calls" with the names listed down the sheet).
Or they can be high-tech, digital versions of paper lists (such a "Calls" category in the "To Do" section of a Palm PDA or in Microsoft Outlook "Tasks").
In addition to holding portable reference material (e.g., telephone/address info), most organizers are designed for managing PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO lists.
Probably thousands of types of organizers have been on the market since the 1980s, from the early rash of pocket Day-Timers to the current flood of high-tech personal digital assistants (PDAs) and PCbased software products like Microsoft Outlook and Lotus Notes.
Should you implement the Getting Things Done One of the best process into what you're currently using, or should tricks for enhancing you install something new?
The answer is, do your personal whichever one will actually help you change your productivity is behavior so you'll use the tools appropriately.
There having organizing are efficiency factors to consider here, too.
I've done some of my best planning and updating for myself when I simply wanted some excuse to use (i.e., play with) my Palm organizer while waiting for dinner in a restaurant!
When considering whether to get and use an organizer, and if so, which one, keep in mind that all you really need to do is manage lists.
You've got to be able to create a list on the run and review it easily and as regularly as you need to.
Once you know what to put on the lists, and how to use them, the medium really doesn't matter.
The Critical Factor of a Filing System A simple and highly functional personal reference system is critical to this process.
The filing system at If your filing system hand is the first thing I assess before beginning the isn't fast, functional, workflow process in anyone's office.
As I noted in and fun, you'll resist chapter 2, the lack of a good general-reference systhe whole process.
tem can be one of the greatest obstacles to imple- CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLS menting a personal management system, and for most of the executives I have personally coached, it represents one of the biggest opportunities for improvement.
Many times I have driven to the local office-supply store with a client and bought a filing cabinet, a big stock of file folders, and a labeler, just so we could create an appropriate place in which to put two-thirds of the "stuff" lying around his/her desk and credenza and even on the office floors.
We're concerned here mostly with general-reference filing as distinct from discrete filing systems devoted to contracts, financial information, or other categories of data that deserve their own place and indexing.
General-reference files should hold articles, brochures, pieces of paper, notes, printouts, faxesbasically anything that you want to keep for its interesting or useful data and that doesn't fit into your specialized filing systems and won't stand up by itself on a shelf (as will large software manuals and seminar binders).
But ask yourself if you still have some personally interesting or confidential support material that should be accessible at any moment, even when your assistant isn't around.
Success Factors for Filing I strongly suggest that you maintain your own personal, at-hand filing system.
It should take you less than one minute to pick something up out of your in-basket or print it from e-mail, decide it needs no action but has some potential future value, and finish storing it in a trusted system.
If it takes you longer than a minute to complete that sequence of actions, you have a significant improvement opportunity, since you probably won't file the document; you'll stack it or stuff it instead.
Besides being fast, the system needs to be fun and easy, current and complete.
Take heart: I've seen people go from resisting to actually enjoying sorting through their stacks once their personal filing system is set up and humming.
Because it requires so much work to make and organize files, people either don't keep them or have junked-up cabinets and drawers full of all sorts of one-of-a-kind items, like a menu for the local take-out cafe or the current train schedule.
Whatever you need to do to get your reference system to that quick and easy standard for everything it has to hold, do it.
My system works wonderfully for me and for many others who try it, and I highly recommend that you consider incorporating all of the following guidelines to really make reference filing automatic.
If you have to get up every time you have some ad hoc piece of paper you want to file, you'll tend to stack it instead of filing it, and you're also likely to just resist the whole in-basket process (because you subconsciously know there's stuff in there that might need filing!).
Many people I have coached have redesigned their office space so they have four general-reference file drawers literally in "swivel distance," instead of across their room.
People have a tendency to want to use their files as a personal organization system, and therefore they attempt to organize them by projects or areas of focus.
One simple alpha system files everything by topic, project, person, or company, so it can be in only three or four places if you forget exactly where you put it.
These would be filed under G. Currently I have four file drawers for my general-reference files, and each is clearly marked on the outside"A-E," "F-L," and so onso I don't have to think about where something goes once it's labeled.
Every once in a while someone has such a huge amount of reference material on one topic or project that it should be put in its own discrete drawer or cabinet.
Have Lots of Fresh Folders I keep a giant stack of fresh, new file folders instantly at hand and reachable from where I sit to process my in-basket.
Nothing is worse than having something to file and not having an abundance of folders to grab from to make the process easy.
If they're stuffed, you'll unconsciously resist putting things in there, and reference materials will tend to stack up instead.
I know almost no one who doesn't have overstuffed file drawers.
If you value your cuticles, and if you want to get rid of your unconscious resistance to filing, then you must keep the drawers loose enough that you can insert and retrieve files without effort.
If the stuff is worth keeping, it's worth keeping so that it's easily accessible, right?
It's said that we're in the Information Age; if there's any validity to that, and if you're doing anything that hinders your usage of it... not smart.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO You may need to create another tier of reference storage to give yourself sufficient working room with your general-reference files at hand.
Material such as finished project notes and "dead" client files may still need to be kept, but can be stored off-site or at least out of your work space.
Label Your File Folders with an Auto Labeler Typeset labels change the nature of your files and your relationship to them.
Labeled files feel comfortable on a boardroom table; everyone can identify them; you can easily see what they are from a distance and in your briefcase; and when you open your file drawers, you get to see what looks almost like a printed index of your files in alphabetical order.
Perhaps later in this new millennium the brain scientists will give us some esoteric and complex neurological explanation for why labeled files work so effectively.
Get Rid of Hanging Files If You Can At the risk of seriously offending a lot of people who are already using hanging files, I recommend that you totally do away with the hanging-file hardware and use just plain folders standing up by themselves in the CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLS file drawer, held up by the movable metal plate in the back.
Here's an e-mail I received recently from a senior manager who actually took my advice after avoiding it for a couple of years because of his investment in the hanging hardware: Your system is FANTASTIC!!
I've completely redone my files at home and at workit only took a combined four days to do it, but I've done away with Pendaflex and have gone to the manila folder system, with A-Z and nothing else.
My desk for some reason is a lot neater, too, without those stacks of "to be filed" stuff hanging around!
If you have to work with hanging files, then I recommend that you:  Label the files, not the hangers.
This will keep the drawer visually neat and prevent the weirdness that results when multiple files make a hanger uneven.
Having to recalibrate files in an alpha system every time a folder gets full is too much trouble.
Keep a big supply of plain hangers and new file folders in the front of your first file drawer so you can make new files and store them in a flash.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO Purge Your Files at Least Once a Year Cleaning house in your files regularly keeps them from going stale and seeming like a black hole, and it also gives you the freedom to keep anything on a whim "in case you might need it."
As I say, I purge my files while I'm on hold on the phone (or marking time on a conference call that's dragging on and on!).
I recommend that all organizations (if they don't have one already) establish a Dumpster Day, when all employees get to come to work in sneakers and jeans, put their phones on do-notdisturb, and get current with all their stored stuff.
* Dumpsters are brought in, and everyone has permission to spend the whole day in purge mode.
A personal Dumpster Day is an ideal thing to put into your tickler file, either during the holidays, at year's end, or around early-spring tax-preparation time, when you might want to tie it in with archiving the previous year's financial files.
It's critical that your full psychic attention be available for the work at hand.
Collection: Corralling Your "Stuff" IN CHAPTER 2 I described the basic procedures for collecting your work.
This chapter will lead you in more detail through the process of getting all your incompletes, all your "stuff," into one placeinto "in."
Just gathering a few more things than you currently have will probably create a positive feeling for you.
But if you can hang in there and really do the whole collection process, 100 percent, it will change your experience dramatically and give you an important new reference point for being on top of your work.
When I coach a client through this process, the collection phase usually takes between one and six hours, though it did take all of twenty hours with one person (finally I told him, "You get the idea").
And you can even capture the rest by creating relevant placeholding notesfor example, "Purge and process boat storage shed" and "Deal with hall closet."
In the real world, you probably won't be able to keep your stuff 100 percent collected all of the time.
There are very practical reasons to gather everything before you start processing it: 1 | it's helpful to have a sense of the volume of stuff you have to deal with; 2 | it lets you know where the "end of the tunnel" is; and 3 | when you're processing and organizing, you don't want to be distracted psychologically by an amorphous mass of stuff that might still be "somewhere."
Once you have all the things that require your attention gathered in one place, you'll automatically be operating from a state of enhanced focus and control.
It may even seem a little counterintuitive, because for the most part, most of that stuff was not, and is not, "that important"; that's why it's still lying around.
But because you think there still could be something important in there, that PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO "stuff" is controlling you and taking up more psychic energy than it deserves.
Keep in mind, you can feel good about what you're not doing, only when you know what you're not doing.
Physical Gathering The first activity is to search your physical environTrain yourself to ment for anything that doesn't belong where it is, the notice and collect way it is, permanently, and put it into your in-basket.
They all go into "in," so they'll be available for later processing.
Many people also have a "personal supplies" drawer at work containing dental floss, Kleenex, breath mints, and so on.
is anything you simply keep for information as needed, such as manuals for your software, the local takeout deli menu, or your kid's soccer schedule.
This category includes your telephone and address information, any material relevant to projects, themes, and topics, and sources such as dictionaries, encyclopedias, and almanacs.
You no doubt have a lot of things that fall into these four categoriesbasically all your tools and your gear, which have no actions tied to them.
But many of the things you might initially interpret as supplies, reference, decoration, or equipment could also have action associated with them because they still aren't exactly the way they need to be.
For instance, most people have, in their desk drawers and on their credenzas and bulletin boards, a lot of reference materials that either are out of date or need to be organized somewhere else.
Likewise, if your supplies drawer is out of control, full of lots of dead or unorganized stuff, that's an incomplete that needs to be captured.
Are the photos of your kids current ones?
In other words, supplies, reference materials, decoration, and equipment may need to be tossed into the in-basket if they're not just where they should be, the way they should be.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Issues About Collecting As you engage in the collecting phase, you may run into one or more of the following:  you've got a lot more than will fit into one in-basket;  you're likely to get derailed into purging and organizing;  you may have some form of stuff already collected and organized; and/or  you're likely to run across some critical things that you want to keep in front of you.
It's also just a great habit to date everything you hand-write, from Post-it notes to your assistant, to voice-mails you download onto a pad, to notes you take on a phone call with a client.
If you're like 98 percent of my clients, your initial gathering activity will collect much more than can be comfortably stacked in an in-basket.
Ultimately you'll be emptying the in-stacks, as you process and organize everything.
CHAPTER 5 | COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" Instant Dumping If it's immediately evident that something is trash, go ahead and toss it when you see it.
You'll be able to decide about it later, when you process the in-basket.
You'll do that later anyway if it's in "in," and it's easier to make those kinds of choices when you're in processing mode.
The objective for the collection process is to get everything into "in" as quickly as possible so you've appropriately retrenched and "drawn the battle lines."
Many people get hit with the purge-and-organize virus as they're going through various areas of their office (and their home).
If that happens to you, it's OK, so long as you have a major open window of time to get through the whole process (like at least a whole week ahead of you).
Otherwise you'll need to break it up into chunks and capture them as little projects or actions to do, with reminders in your system, like "Purge four-drawer cabinet" or "Clean office closet."
What you don't want to do is let yourself get caught running down a rabbit trail cleaning up some piece of your work and then not be able to get through the whole action-management implementation process.
It may take longer than you think, and you want to go for the gold and finish processing all your stuff and setting up your system as soon as possible.
You may already have some lists and some sort of organization system in place.
But unless you're thoroughly familiar with this workflow-processing model and have implemented it previously, I recommend that you treat those lists as items still to be processed, like everything else in "in."
Often in the collection process someone will run across a piece of paper or a document that causes her to say, "Oh, my God!
She doesn't want to put whatever it is into the huge stack of other stuff in her in-basket because she's afraid she might lose track of it again.
You're going to get all that processed and emptied soon anyway, so it won't be lost.
If you can't deal with the action in the moment, and you still just have to have the reminder right in front of you, go ahead and create an "emergency" stack somewhere close at hand.
Keep in mind that some potential anxiousness is going to surface as you make your stuff more conscious to you than it's been.
Many people use their whole desktop as "in"; if you're one of them, you'll have several stacks around you to begin your "in" collection with.
Desk Drawers Next tackle the desk drawers, if you have them, one at a time.
Any actionable items?
If the answer to any of these questions is yes, put the actionable item into "in" or write a note about it.
Again, whether you use this opportunity to clean and organize the drawers or simply make a note to do it later will depend on how much time you have and how much stuff is in there.
Countertops Continue working your way around your office, collecting everything sitting on the tops of credenzas or counters or cabinets that doesn't belong there permanently.
Often there will be stacks of reading material, mail, and miscellaneous folders and support material for actions and projects.
Maybe there is reference material that you've already used and just left out.
Be careful to check with yourself, though, about whether there is some potential action tied to the material before you put it away.
If there is, put it into "in" so you can deal with it later in the process.
These are perfect areas for stashing large supplies and reference materials, and equally seductive for holding deeper levels of stuff.
Often I'll your collectible and find collectibles and nostalgia that aren't meaningful nostalgia items are to my clients any longer.
Again, if some of these areas are out of control and need purging and organizing, write that on a note and toss it into "in."
Any attention on your pictures, artwork, plaques, or decorations?
Equipment, Furniture, arid Fixtures Is there anything you want to do to or change about any of your office equipment or furniture or the physical space itself?
If there are actionable items, you know what to do: make a note and put it in "in."
Other Locations Depending on the scope of what you're addressing in this process, you may want to do some version of the same kind of gathering anywhere else you keep stuff.
CHAPTER 5 I COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" Some executives I work with find it immensely valuable to take me home with them and have me walk them through this process there as well.
Mental Gathering: The Mind-Sweep Once you feel you've collected all the physical things in your environment that need processing, you'll want to collect anything else that may be residing in your psychic RAM.
You could make one long list on a pad, but given how you will later be processing each item individually, it's actually more effective to put everything on separate sheets.
You will likely not keep these pieces of paper (unless you decide that low-tech is your best organizing method), but it'll be handy to have them as discrete items to deal with as you're processing.
You'll find that things will tend to occur to you in somewhat random fashionlittle things, big things, personal things, professional things, in no particular order.
It's much better to overdo this process than to risk missing something.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO "Trigger" List To assist in clearing your head, you may want to review the following "Incompletion Triggers" list, item by item, to see if you've forgotten anything.
"Incompletion Triggers" List Professional Projects started, not completed Projects that need to be started Commitments/promises to others Boss/partners Colleagues Subordinates Other people in organization "Outside" people Customers Other organizations Professionals Communications to make/get Internal/External Initiate or respond to: Phone calls Voice-mail E-mail Pages Faxes Letters Memos Other writing to finish/submit Reports Evaluations/reviews Proposals Articles Promotional materials Manuals/instructions Rewrites and edits Meetings that need to be set/requested Who needs to know about what , decisions?
Significant read/review Financial Cash flow Statistics Budgets Forecasts/projections P&Ls Balance sheet Credit line Planning/organizing Formal planning (goals, targets, objectives) Current projects (next stages) Upcoming projects CHAPTER 5 I COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" Business/marketing plans Organizational initiatives Upcoming events Meetings Presentations Organizational structuring Changes in facilities Installation of new systems/equipment Travel Banks Receivables Payables Petty cash Administration Legal issues Insurance Personnel Policies/procedures Customers Internal External Marketing Promotion Sales Customer service Systems Phones Computers Office equipment Other equipment Utilities Filing Storage Inventories Supplies Office/site Office organization , Furniture Decorations Waiting for.
Information Delegated tasks/projects Completions critical to projects Replies to: Letters Memos Calls Proposals Requisitions Reimbursements Petty cash Insurance Ordered items Items being repaired Tickets Decisions of others Professional development Training/seminars Things to learn Things to look up Skills to practice/learn especially re: computers Tape/video training Resumes Outside education Research need to find out about... Professional wardrobe PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Personal Projects started, not completed Projects that need to be started Commitments/promises to others Spouse Children Family Friends Professionals Borrowed items Projects: other organizations Service Civic Volunteer Communications to make/get Family Friends Professional Initiate or respond to: Phone calls Letters Cards Upcoming events Special occasions Birthdays Bills Banks Investments Loans Taxes Insurance Legal affairs Filing Waiting for.
Travel Weekend trips Vacations Zoning Social events Cultural events Sporting events R&D things to do Places to go People to meet/invite Local attractions Administration Financial Taxes Builders/contractors Heating/air-conditioning Plumbing Electricity Roofing Landscape CHAPTER 5 | COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" Driveway Walls/floors/ceilings Decoration Furniture Utilities Appliances Lightbulbs/wiring Kitchen things Washer/dryer/vacuum Areas to organize/clean Computers Software Hardware Connections CD-ROM E-mail/Internet TV VCR Music/CDs/tapes Cameras/film Phones Answering machine Sports equipment Closets/clothes Garage/storage Vehicle repair/maintenance Tools Luggage Pets Health care Doctors Dentists Specialists Hobbies Books/records/tapes/disks Errands Hardware store Drugstore Market Bank Cleaner Stationer Community Neighborhood Schools Local government Civic issues The "In" Inventory If your head is empty of everything, personally and professionally, then your in-basket is probably quite full, and likely spilling over.
In addition to the paper-based and physical items in your inbasket, your inventory of "in" should include any resident voicemails and all the e-mails that are currently staged in the "in" area of your communication software.
It should also include any items PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO on your organizer lists for which you have not yet determined next actions.
I usually recommend that clients download Connection is their voice-mails onto paper notes and put those into completed when their in-baskets, along with their whole organizer you can easily see notebooks, which usually need significant reassessthe edges to the ment.
functionality, I suggest you print out any task and todo lists and put them, too, into your in-basket.
Of course, one of the main factors in people's resistance to collecting stuff into "in" is the lack of a good processing and organizing methodology to handle it.
Processing: Getting "In" to Empty ASSUMING THAT YOU have collected everything that has your attention, your job now is to actually get to the bottom of "in."
Getting "in" to empty doesn't mean actually doing all the actions and projects that you've collected.
When you've finished processing "in," you will have | | | | trashed what you don't need; completed any less-than-two-minute actions; handed off to others anything that can be delegated; sorted into your own organizing system reminders of actions that require more than two minutes; and 5 | identified any larger commitments (projects) you now have, based on the input.
To get an overview of this process, you may find it useful here to refer to the Workflow Diagram on page 120.
The center column illustrates all the steps involved in processing and deciding your next actions.
This chapter focuses on the components in the diagram's center column, the steps from "in" to next action.
You'll immediately see the natural organization that results from following this process for each of your open loops.
I recommend that you read through this chapter and the next one, on organizing your actions, before you actually start processing what you've collected in "in."
When I coach clients through this process, it invariably becomes a dance back and forth between the simple decisionmaking stage of processing the open loops and the trickier task of figuring out the best way to enter these decisions in a client's particular organization system.
Many of my coaching clients, for example, are eager to get set up personally on a PDA organizer that will synchronize with Microsoft Outlook, which their company is using for e-mail and scheduling.
The first thing we have to do (after we've collected the in-basket) is make sure all their hardware and software are working.
Then we clean up (print out and erase, usually) everything they have previously tried to organize in their Outlook task lists and put it all into "in."
As we begin to process the in-basket, the client can go immediately to his computer and type his action steps directly into the system he will ultimately depend on.
If you're not sure yet what you're going to be using as a personal reminder system, don't worry.
You can begin very appropriately with the low-tech initial process of notes on pieces of paper.
Processing Guidelines The best way to learn this model is by doing.
Top Item First Even if the second item down is a personal note to you from the president of your country, and the top item is a piece of junk mail, you've got to process the junk mail first!
That's an Process does exaggeration to make a point, but the principle is an not mean "spend important one: everything gets processed equally.
The verb "process" does not mean "spend time on."
Emergency Scanning Is Not Processing Most people get to their in-basket or their e-mail and look for the most urgent, most fun, or most interesting stuff to deal with first.
So you check to make sure there are no land mines about to explode and to see if your client has e-mailed you back OK'ing the big proposal.
But that's not processing your in-basket; it's emergency scanning.
When you're in processing mode, you must get into the habit of starting at one end and just cranking through items one at a time, in order.
As soon as you break that rule, and process only what you feel like processing, and in whatever order, you'll invariably begin to leave things unprocessed.
Theoretically, you should flip your in-basket upside down and process first the first thing that came in.
And if you're The in-basket is a processing station, going to attempt to clear up a big backlog of e-mails not a storage bin.
staged in "in," you'll actually discover it's more efficient to process the last-in first because of all the discussion threads that accumulate on top of one another.
One Item at a Time You may find you have a tendency, while processing your inbasket, to pick something up, not know exactly what you want to do about it, and then let your eyes wander onto another item farther down the stack and get engaged with it.
The focus on just one thing forces the requisite attention and decision-making to get through all your stuff.
Some personality types really need to shift their focus away from something for at least a minute in order to make a decision about it.
When I see this going on with someone, I let him take two or sometimes three things out at once as he's processing.
Remember, multitasking is an exceptionand it works only if you hold to the discipline of working through every item in short order, and never avoid any decision for longer than a minute or two.
And you're going to make a firm next-action decision about CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY each one.
There will be three types of things in this category:  Trash  Items to incubate  Reference material Trash If you've been following my suggestions, you'll no doubt already have tossed out a big pile of stuff.
So don't be surprised if there's still a lot more to throw away as you process your stuff.
Processing all the things in your world will make you more conscious of what you are going to do and what you should not be doing.
One director of a foundation I worked with discovered that he had allowed way too many e-mails (thousands!)
to accumulate e-mails that in fact he wasn't ever going to respond to anyway.
It's likely that at some point you'll come up against the question PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO of whether or not to keep something for future reference.
If you make a clean distinction between what's reference and supplies and what requires action, and if your reference system is simple and workable, you can easily keep as much material as you can accommodate.
My suggestion is that you make the distinction about whether something is actionable or not.
CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY  An advertisement for the next Quicken software upgrade for your personal finances.
There's nothing to do on this now, but you'd like to be reminded when the time comes to start planning for it.
Put them on your calendar or in a "tickler" file.
The point of all of these incubation procedures is that they give you a way to get the items off your mind right now and let you feel confident that some reminder of the possible action will resurface at an appropriate time.
I'll elaborate on these in more detail in the next chapter, on organizing.
* Reference Many of the things you will uncover in "in" will need no action but may have value as potentially useful information about projects *One of your extra stack baskets is ideal for this purpose.
Use it temporarily during this initial processing to gather things to organize later.
Afterward you can use it to hold pending work-in-progress papers and physical reminders of next actions.
Ideally, you have already set up a workable filing system (as described in chapter 4) for your reference and support information.
As you come across material in your in-basket and e-mail that you'd like to keep for archival or support purposes, file it.
You'll probably discover that there are lots of miscellaneous kinds of things that you want to keep but have piled up in stacks or stuffed into drawers because your reference system was too formal or just plain nonexistent.
Let me remind you here that a lessthan-sixty-second, fun-to-use general-reference filing system within arm's reach of where you sit is a mission-critical component of full implementation of this methodology.
In the "battle zone" of real life, if it's not easy, fast, and fun to file, you'll stack instead of organizing.
And then it will become much more difficult to keep things processed.
If there's something that needs to be done about the item in "in," then you need to decide what exactly that next action is.
The next action should be easy to figure out, but there are often some quick analyses and several planning steps that haven't occurred yet in your mind, and these have to happen before you can determine precisely what has to happen to complete the item, even if it's a fairly simple one.
Clean the garage  Do my taxes - Conference I'm going to  Bobby's birthday  Press release  Performance reviews  Management changes Although each of these items may seem relatively clear as a task or project, determining the next action on each one will take some thought.
The action steps"Call John," "Waiting for K-l," "E-mail Sandra"are what need to be decided about everything that is actionable in your in-basket.
Many people think they've determined the "next action" when they get it down to "set meeting."
But that's not the next action, Until you know because it's not descriptive of physical behavior.
Well, it could be with a phone physical action is, call or an e-mail, but to whom?
If you don't there's still more decide now, you'll still have to decide at some other thinking required point, and what this process is designed to do is actubefore anything can ally get you to finish the thinking exercise about this happen.
Deciding isn't really an action, because actions take time, and deciding doesn't.
Either way, there's still a next action to be determined in order to move the project forward.
Once You Decide What the Action Step is You have three options once you decide what the next action really is.
Do It If the next action can be done in two minutes or less, do it when you first pick the item up.
If you can browse the catalog in just a minute or two to see if there might be anything of interest in it, browse away, and then toss it, route it, or reference it as required.
If the next action on something is to leave a quick message on someone's voice-mail, make the call now.
The rationale for the two-minute rule is that that's more or less the point where it starts taking longer to store and track an item than to deal with it the first time it's in your hands-in other words, it's the efficiency cutoff.
Many people find that getting into the habit of following the two-minute rule creates a dramatic improvement in their productivity.
One vice president of a large software company told me PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO that it gave him an additional hour a day of quality discretionary time!
He was one of those 300-e-mails-a-day high-tech executives, highly focused for most of the workday on The two-minute three key initiatives.
Many of those e-mails were rule is magic.
But because they were not on a topic in his rifle sights, he would just stage the e-mails in "in," to get to "later."
When I coached him we went through all 800-plus e-mails he currently had in "in."
It turned out that a lot could be dumped, quite a few needed to be filed as reference, and many others required less-than-two-minute replies that he whipped through.
I checked with him a year later, and he was still current!
He never let his e-mails mount up beyond a screenful anymore.
He said it had changed the nature of his division because of the dramatic decrease in his own response time.
That's a rather dramatic testimonial, but it's an indication of just how critical some of these simple processing behaviors can be, especially as the volume and speed of the input increase for you personally.
If you have a long open window of time in which to process your in-basket, you can extend the cutoff for each item to five or ten minutes.
It's not a bad idea to time yourself for a few of these while you're becoming familiar with the process.
Most clients I work CHAPTERS | PROCESSING: SETTING "IN" TO EMPTY with have difficulty estimating how long two min- You'll be surprised utes actually is, and they greatly underestimate how how many twolong certain actions are likely to take.
For instance, if minute actions you your action is to leave someone a message, and you can perform even get the real person instead of his or her voice-mail, on your most critical projects.
There's nothing you really need to track about your two-minute actionsyou just do them.
For instance, if you act to replace the cartridge in your favorite pen and discover that you're out of cartridge refills, you'll want to decide on the next action about getting them ("Buy refills at the store") and do, delegate, or defer it appropriately.
Adhere to the two-minute rule and see how much you get done in the process of clearing out your "in" stacks.
Many people are amazed by how many two-minute actions are possible, often on some of their most critical current projects.
Let me make one more observation regarding the twominute rule, this time as it relates to your comfort with typing e-mails.
If you're in a large-volume e-mail environment, you'll greatly improve your productivity by increasing your typing speed and using the shortcut keyboard commands for your operating system and your common e-mail software.
Too many sophisticated professionals are seriously hamstrung because they still hunt and peck and try to use their mouse too much.
More work could be dispatched faster by combining the two-minute rule with improved computer skills.
Delegate It If the next action is going to take longer than two minutes, ask yourself, "Am I the best person to be doing it?"
A "systematic format" could be any of the following:  Send the appropriate party an e-mail.
Leave him or her a voice-mail.
If you're passing on paper-based material as part of the handoff, a written communication is obviously the way to go; as with e-mail, the person you hand it off to can then deal with it on his or her own schedule.
Voice-mail can be efficient, and many professionals live by it; the downside is that tracking becomes an additional requirement for both you and the recipient, and what you say is not always what gets heard.
The least preferable option would be to interrupt what both you and the person are doing to talk about the item.
This is immediate, but it hampers workflow for both of you and has the same downside as voice-mail: no written record.
As I will walk you through in the next chapter, about organizing, you'll see that a significant category to manage is "Waiting For."
As you develop your own customized system, what you eventually hand off and then track could look like a list in a planner, a file folder holding separate papers for each item, and/or a list categorized as "Waiting For" in your software.
For now, if you don't have a trusted system set up already, just put a note on a piece of paper"W/F: reply from Bob"and put that into a "Pending" stack of notes in a separate pile or tray that may result from your processing.
In the exam- ple cited above about waiting for the last K-l to come in so you can do your taxes, the next action is currently on someone else's plate.
This, of all the categories in your personal system, is the most crucial one to keep tabs on.
Defer It It's likely that most of the next actions you determine for things in "in" will be yours to do and will take longer than two minutes to complete.
A call you need to make to a customer; an e-mail you need to spend a little time thinking about and drafting to your team; a gift you need to buy for your brother at the stationery store; a piece of software you need to download from the Web and PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO try out; a conversation you must have with your spouse about an investment you think you should makeall of these fit that description.
These actions will have to be written down somewhere and then organized in the appropriate categories so you can access them when you need to.
For the moment, go ahead and put Postits on the pieces of paper in "in," with the action written on them, and add these to the "Pending" stack of papers that have been processed.
The "Pending" Things That Are Left If you follow the instructions in this chapter, you'll dump a mess of things, file a bunch, do a lot of two-minute actions, and hand off a number of items to other people.
You'll also wind up with a stack of items that have actions associated with them that you still need to dosoon, someday, or on a specific dateand reminders of things you're waiting on from other people.
This "Pending" group is made up of the actions you've delegated or deferred.
It is what still needs to be organized in some fashion in your personal system, a topic I'll cover in step-by-step detail in the next chapter.
Identifying the Projects You Have This last step in getting to the bottom of "in" requires a shift in perspective from the single-action details to the larger picture your projects.
If you look through an inventory of actions that you have already been generating"Call Frank about the car alarm"; "E-mail Bernadette re conference materials"you'll no doubt recognize a number of things that are larger than the single action you've defined.
There's still going to be something about "car alarm" to CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY do after the call to Frank, and there will still be something to handle about the conference after the e-mail to Bernadette.
I hope you're able to see the very practical reason for defining projects as broadly as I do: If the action step you've identified will not complete the commitment, then you'll need some stake in the ground to keep reminding you Right now you of actions you have pending until you have closure.
probably have You need to make a list of projects.
A "Projects" list between thirty and a hundred projects.
The purpose of this list is not to reflect your priorities but just to ensure that you've got placeholders for all those open loops.
Whether you draw up your "Projects" list while you're initially processing your in-basket or after you've set up your action lists doesn't really matter.
It just needs to be done at some point, and it must be maintained, as it's the key driver for reviewing where you are and where you want to be.
For now, let's make sure your organizing setup is "all systems go."
Organizing: Setting Up the Right Buckets HAVING A TOTAL and seamless system of organization in place gives you tremendous power because it allows your mind to let go of lower-level thinking and graduate to intuitive focusAirtight organization ing, undistracted by matters that haven't been dealt is required for your focus to remain on the broader horizon.
In this chapter I'll lead you through the organizing steps and tools that will be required as you process your in-basket.
As you initially process "in," you'll create lists and groupings of things you want to organize and you'll invariably think of additional items to include.
It will evolve as you process your stuff and but I forgot where test out whether you have put everything in the best I put it.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS WORKFLOW DIAGRAMORGANIZING PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO The Basic Categories There are seven primary types of things that you'll want to keep track of and manage from an organizational perspective:  A "Projects" list  Project support material  Calendared actions and information  "Next Actions" lists  A "Waiting For" list  Reference material  A "Someday/Maybe" list The Importance of Hard Edges It's critical that all of these categories be kept pristinely distinct from one another.
They each represent a discrete type of agreement we make with ourselves, and if they lose their edges and begin to blend, much of the value of organizing will be lost.
If you put reference materials in the same pile as The categories must things you still want to read, for example, you'll go be kept visually, numb to the stack.
If you put items on your "Next physically, and Actions" lists that really need to go on the calendar, psychologically because they have to occur on specific days, then you separate.
won't trust your calendar and you'll continually have to reassess your action lists.
If you have a project that you're not going to be doing anything about for some time, it must go onto your "Someday/Maybe" list so you can relate to the "Projects" list with the rigorous action-generating focus it needs.
And if something you're "Waiting For" is included on one of your action lists, you'll continually get bogged down by nonproductive rethinking.
All You Really Need Is Lists and Folders Once you know what you need to keep track of (covered in the previous chapter, on Processing), all you really need is lists and CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS folders for reference and support materials.
Your lists / would not give a (which, as I've indicated, could also be items in fold- fig for the ers) will keep track of projects and someday/maybes, simplicity on this as well as the actions you'll need to take on your side of complexity, active open loops.
Folders (digital or paper-based) but I would give my life for the will be required to hold your reference material and simplicity on the the support information for active projects.
other side of Lots of people have been making lists for years complexity.
But most list-makers haven't put the appropriate things on their lists, or have left them incomplete, which has kept the lists themselves from being very functional.
Once you know what goes on the lists, however, things get much easier; then you just need a way to manage them.
As I've said, you shouldn't bother to create some external structuring of the priorities on your lists that you'll then have to rearrange or rewrite as things change.
Attempting to impose such scaffolding has been a big source of frustration in many people's organizing.
The list is just a way for you to keep track of the total inventory of active things to which you have made a commitment, and to have that inventory available for review.
A list could look like one of three things: (1) a file folder with separate paper notes for the items within the category; (2) an actual list on a titled piece of paper (often within a loose-leaf organizer or planner); or (3) an inventory in a software program or on a digital assistant, such as Microsoft Outlook task categories or a category on a handheld PDA.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Organizing Action Reminders If you've emptied your in-basket, you'll undoubtedly have created a stack of "Pending" reminders for yourself, representing longerthan-two-minute actions that cannot be delegated to someone else.
You'll want to sort all of this into groupings that make sense to you so you can review them as options for work to do when you have time.
You'll also want to decide on the most appropriate way physically to organize those groups, whether as items in folders or on lists, either paper-based or digital.
The Actions That Go on Your Calendar For the purposes of organization, as I've said, there are two basic kinds of actions: those that must be done on a certain day and/or at a particular time, and those that just need to be done as soon as you can get to them, around your other calendared items.
As you were processing your in-basket, you probably came across things that you put right into your calendar as they showed up.
You may have realized that the next action on The calendar should getting a medical checkup, for example, was to call show only the "hard and make the appointment, and so (since the action landscape" around required two minutes or less) you actually did it when which you do the it occurred to you.
Writing the appointment into rest of your actions.
What many people want to do, however, based CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS on old habits of writing daily to-do lists, is put actions on the calendar that they think they'd really like to get done next Monday, say, but that then actually might not, and that might then have to be taken over to following days.
When the calendar is relegated to its proper role in organizing, the majority of the actions that you need to do are left in the category of "as soon as possible, against all the other things I have to do."
Organizing As-Soon-As-Possible Actions by Context Over many years I have discovered that the best way to be reminded of an "as soon as I can" action is by the particular context required for that actionthat is, either the tool or the location or the person needed to complete it.
How discrete these categories will need to be will depend on (1) how many actions you actually have to track; and (2) how often you change the contexts within which to do them.
If you are that rare person who has only twenty-five next actions, a single "Next Actions" list might suffice.
If, however, you have fifty or a hundred next actions pending, keeping all of those on one big list would make it too difficult to see what you needed to see; each time you got any window of time to do something, you'd have to do unproductive resorting.
When you went out to do odds and ends, you'd probably want to pick out your errands and make another list.
Another productivity factor that this kind of organization supports is leveraging your energy when you're in a certain mode.
When you're in "phone mode," it helps to make a lot of phone callsjust crank down your "Calls" list.
The Most Common Categories of Action Reminders You'll probably find that at least a few of the following common list headings for next actions will make sense for you:  "Calls"  "At Computer" "Errand's"  "Office Actions" or "At Office" (miscellaneous)  "At Home"  "Agendas" (for people and meetings)  "Read/Review" "Calls" This is the list of all the phone calls you need to make; you can work off it as long as you have a phone available.
Hav- CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS ing a discrete "Calls" list makes it much easier to focus and intuitively pick the best call to make in the moment.
"At Computer" If you work with a computerparticularly if you move around with a laptop or have a PC at work and another one at homeit can be helpful to group all those actions that you need to do when it's on and running.
This will allow you to see all your options for computer work to do, reminding you of all the e-mails you need to send, the documents you need to draft or edit, and so on.
When I'm on a plane, I can't easily connect to about where and the Web or to my server, as many actions require.
So howyou can and instead of having to rethink what I can and can't do can't do which whenever I look at my "At Computer" list, I can trust actions, and organize your lists that none of my "At Computer" actions require that I accordingly.
If you have a computer only at work, you may not need a separate "At Computer" list; "Office Actions" may cover those actions because the office is the only place you can do them anyway.
(Similarly, if you have a computer only at home, and it's not a laptop, you may be able to put computer-specific actions on your "At Home" list.)
This list could, of course, be nothing more elaborate than a Post-it that you keep in your planner somewhere, or a screen in an "Errands" category of the "To Do" section on your Palm organizer.
It's often helpful to track sublists within individual "Errands" items.
simplicity that lies Because I travel in major metropolitan areas so beyond much, I keep two "Errands" lists"ErrandsOjai" sophistication.
"Office Actions'/"At Office" If you work in an office, there will be certain things that you can do only there, and a list of those will be a useful thing to have in front of you thenthough obviously, if you have a phone and a computer in your office, and you have "Calls" and "At Computer" as separate lists, they'll be in play as well.
I'd use an "Office Actions" or "At Office" list for anything that required an Internet connection available only, or even most conveniently, in the officefor example, a reminder to download a large software program from the Web would go on this list for me.
"At Home" Many actions can be done only at home, and it makes sense to keep a list specific to that context.
I'm sure you've got numerous personal and around-the-house projects, and often the CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS next thing to do on them is just to do them.
"Agendas" Invariably you'll find that many of your next actions need to either occur in a real-time interaction with someone or be brought up in a committee, team, or staff meeting.
Standing meetings You have to talk to your partner about an idea for next year; you want to check with your spouse about and people you deal with on an ongoing his schedule for the spring; you need to delegate a task to your secretary that's too complicated to basis may need their own "Agenda" explain in an e-mail.
And you must make an lists.
These next actions should be put on separate "Agenda" lists for each of those people and for that meeting (assuming that you attend it regularly).
If you're conscientious about determining all your next actions, though, you may find that you'll need somewhere between three and fifteen of these kinds of lists.
I recommend that separate files or lists be kept for bosses, partners, assistants, spouses, and children.
If you participate in standing meetingsstaff meetings, project meetings, board meetings, committee meetings, whateverthey, too, deserve their own files, in which you can collect things that will need to be addressed on those occasions.
For instance, if you have a contractor doing a significant piece of work on your house or property, you can create a list for him for the duration of the project.
"Read/Review" You will no doubt have discovered in your inbasket a number of things for which your next action is to read.
I hope you will have held to the two-minute rule and dispatched a number of those quick-skim items alreadytossing, filing, or routing them forward as appropriate.
People who first to complain of don't have their "Read/Review" material organized its shortness.
-Jean can waste a lot of time, since life is full of weird little de windows when it could be processed.
Organizing "Waiting For" Like reminders of the actions you need to do, reminders of all the things that you're waiting to get back from or get done by others have to be sorted and grouped.
You won't necessarily be tracking discrete action steps here, but more often final deliverables or projects that others are responsible for, such as the tickets you've ordered from the theater, the scanner that's coming for the office, the OK on the proposal from your client, and so on.
When the next action on something is up to someone else, you don't need an action reminder, just a trigger about what you're waiting for from whom.
Your role is to review that list as often as you need to and assess whether you ought to be taking an action such as checking the status or lighting a fire under the project.
You'll probably find it works best to keep this "Waiting For" list close at hand, in the same system as your own "Next Actions" reminder lists.
When the proposal comes in, you have to review it (it lands in your "Read/Review" stack-basket).
* You'll get a great feeling when you know that your "Waiting For" list is the complete inventory of everything you care about that other people are supposed to be doing.
Using the Original Item as Its Own Action Reminder The most efficient way to track your action reminders is to add them to lists or folders as they occur to you.
The originating trigger won't be needed after you have processed it.
You Keep actionable might take notes in the meeting with your boss, but e-mails and paper you can toss those after you've pulled out any projects separated from all and actions associated with them.
ple try to archive voice-mails that they still need to "do something about," that's not the most effective way to manage the reminders embedded in them.
Certain kinds of input will most efficiently serve as their own reminders of required actions, rather than your having to write something about them on a list.
This is particularly true for some paperbased materials and some e-mails.
It would obviously be overkill to write "Review Fortune magazine" on some action list when you could just as easily toss the magazine itself into your "Read/ Review" basket to act as the trigger.
*Digital list managers (like the Palm's) or low-tech papers in separate folders have an advantage, here over lists on paper because they let you easily move an item from one category to another as the action changes, without your having to rewrite anything.
* The specific nature of your work, your input, and your workstation may make it more efficient to organize other categories using only the original paper itself.
A customer-service professional, for instance, may deal with numerous requests that show up in a standard written form, and in that case maintaining a basket or file containing only those actionable items is the best way to manage them.
Whichever option you select, the reminders should be in visibly discrete categories based upon the next action required.
If the next action on a service order is to make a call, it should be in a "Calls" group; if the action step is to review information and input it into the computer, it should be labeled "At Computer."
Most undermining of the effectiveness of many workflow systems I see is the fact that all the documents of one type (e.g., service requests) are kept in a single tray, even though different kinds of actions may be required on each one.
Just having them "organized" isn't sufficient to get them off your mindyou've also got to review them appropriately.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO call, another needs data reviewed, and still another is waiting for someone to get back with some informationbut they're all sorted together.
This arrangement can cause a person's mind to go numb to the stack because of all the decisions that are still pending about the next-action level of doing.
My personal system is highly portable, with almost everything kept on lists, but I still maintain two categories of paperbased reminders.
In the latter I put anything for which the next action is simply to input data into my computer (business cards that need to get into my telephone/address list, quotes for my "Quotes" database, articles about restaurants I want to put on my "TravelCities" sublists, etc.).
Managing E-mail-Based Workflow Like some paper-based materials, e-mails that need action are sometimes best as their own remindersin this case within the tracked e-mail system itself.
This is especially likely to be true if you get a lot of e-mail and spend a lot of your work time with your e-mail software booted up.
E-mails that you need to act on may then be stored within the system instead of having their embedded actions written out on a list.
Many of my clients have found it helpful to set up two or three unique folders on their e-mail navigator bars.
True, most folders in e-mail should be used for reference or archived materials, but it's also possible to set up a workable system that will keep your actionable messages discretely organized, outside of the "in" area itself (which is where most people keep them).
I recommend that you create one folder for any longer-thantwo-minute e-mails that you need to act on (again, you should be able to dispatch many messages right off the bat by following the two-minute rule).
The folder name should begin with a prefix letter or symbol so that (1) it looks different from your reference folders and (2) it sits at the top of your folders in the navigator bar.
Your resulting "FACTION" folder will hold those e-mails that you need to do something about.
Then, as you receive e-mails that indicate that someone is going to do something that you care about tracking, you can drag them over into the "@WAITING FOR" file.
It can also hold reminders for anything that you delegate via e-mail: when you forward something, or use e-mail to make a request or delegate an action, just save a copy into the "@WAITING FOR" file.
* Some applications (such as Lotus Notes) allow you to file a copy of an e-mail into one of your folders as you send it (with a "Send and File" button).
In the latter case, what seems to work best for many is to copy ("cc" or "bcc") themselves when they delegate via e-mail, and then to pull that copy into their "@WAITING FOR" folder.
(It's relatively easy to program Outlook to automatically send any e-mail that you "cc" to yourself into a designated folder, which would replicate the process just described.)
Getting E-mail "In" to "Empty" The method detailed above will enable you to actually get everything out of your e-mail in-basket, which will be a huge boon to your clarity about and control of your day-to-day work.
You'll reclaim "in" as "in," so anything residing there will be like a message on your answering machinea blinking light telling you you need to process something!
Most people use their e-mail "in" for staging still-undecided actionable things and reference, a practice that rapidly numbs the mind: they know they've got to reassess everything every *Microsoft Outlook allows users to copy or move e-mails into its "Tasks" context, which, if organized according to my recommended categories, could work equally well.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO It requires much less energy to maintain e-mail at a zero base than at a thousand base.
If you never had more than a screenful of e-mails, this approach might be reasonably functional, but with the volume most professionals are dealing with these days, that doesn't apply.
It means that you've DELETED what you could, FILED what you wanted to keep but don't need to act on, DONE the less-than-two-minute responses, and moved into your reminder folders all the things you're waiting for and all your actionable e-mails.
Now you can open the "@ACTION" file and review the e-mails that you've determined you need to spend time on.
Isn't that process easier to relate to than fumbling through multiple screens, fearing all the while that you may miss something that'll blow up on you?
supply the reminders you need to see when you need to see them, so you can trust your choices about what you're doing (and what you're not doing).
Before you leave the office for the day, the actionable e-mails that you still have pending must be reviewed individually, just like your "Calls" or "At Computer" lists.
Distributing action triggers in a folder, on lists, and/or in an e-mail system is perfectly OK, as long as you review all of the categories to which you've entrusted your triggers equally, as required.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS In order to hang out with friends or take a long, aimless walk and truly have nothing on your mind, you've got to know where all your actionable items are located, what they are, and that they will wait.
Organizing Project Reminders Creating and maintaining one list of all your projects (that is, again, every commitment or desired outcome that may require more than one action step to complete) can be a profound experience!
If you haven't done so already, I recommend that initially you make a "Projects" list in a very simple format, similar to the ones you've used for your lists of actions: it can be a category in a digital organizer, a page in a loose-leaf planner, or even a single file folder labeled "PROJECTS," with either a master list or separate sheets of paper for each one.
The "Projects" List(s) The "Projects" list is not meant to hold plans or details about your projects themselves, nor should you try to keep it arranged by priority or size or urgencyit's just a comprehensive index of your open loops.
You actually won't be working off of the "Projects" list during your day-to-day activities; for the most part, your action lists and any ad hoc tasks that come up will constitute your tactical in-the-moment focus.
The real value of the "Projects" list lies in the current "Projects" complete review it can provide (at least once a week), list is the major allowing you to ensure that you have action steps operational tool for defined for all of your projects, and that nothing is moving from treeslipping through the cracks.
You'll also know that you have an inventory available to you (and to others) whenever it seems advisable to evaluate workload(s).
The organizing system merely provides placeholders for all your open loops and options so your mind can more easily make the necessary intuitive, moment-to-moment strategic decisions.
Frankly, it doesn't matter how many different lists of projects you have, so long as you look at the contents of all of them as often as you need to, since for the most part you'll do that in one fell swoop during your Weekly Review.
Personal/Professional Many people feel more comfortable seeing their lists divided up between personal and professional * projects.
If you're among them, be advised that your "Personal" list will need to be reviewed as judiciously as your "Professional" one, and not just saved for weekends.
Many actions on personal things will need to be handled on weekdays, exactly like everything else.
And often some of the greatest pressures on professionals stem from the personal aspects of their lives that they are letting slip.
Delegated Projects If you're a senior manager or executive, you probably have several projects that you are directly responsible for but have handed off to people who report to you.
While you could, of course, put them on your "Waiting For" list, it might make better sense to create a "ProjectsDelegated" list to track CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS them: your task will be simply to review the list regularly enough to ensure that everything on it is moving along appropriately.
Specific Types of Projects Some professionals have as part of their work several different projects of the same type, which in some instances it maybe valuable to group together as a sublist of "Projects."
These events are "projects" like the rest, in that I need to keep noting whether things are moving along on and in place for them until they're completed.
But I find it helpful to see them all organized on one list, in the order in which they are coming up on my calendar, apart from my other projects.
Just realize that this approach will work only if it represents a complete set of all of those situations that require action, and only if you review them regularly along with the rest of your projects, keeping them current and conscious.
What About Subprojects?
Some of your projects will likely have major subprojects, each of which could in theory be seen as a whole project.
If you're moving into a new house, for instance, and are upgrading and changing much of the property, you may have a list of actionable items like "Finalize landscaping," "Renovate kitchen," "Rewire basement," and so on, all of which could in themselves be considered separate projects.
Do you make all of this one entry on your "Projects" PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO listsay, "Finish new home renovations"or do you write up each of the subprojects as an individual line item?
Actually, it won't matter, as long as you review all the components of the project as frequently as you need to to stay productive.
No external tool or organizing format is going to be perfect for sorting both horizontally across and vertically down through all your projects; you'll still have to be aware of the whole in some cohesive way (such as via your Weekly Review).
If you make the large project your one listing on your "Projects" list, you'll want to keep a list of the subprojects and/or the project plan itself as "project support material" to be reviewed when you come to that major item.
I would recommend doing it this way if big pieces of the project are dependent on other pieces getting done first.
In that scenario you might have subprojects with no next actions attached to them because they are in a sense "waiting for" other things to happen before they can move forward.
However, you might be able to proceed on "Finalize landscaping" independent of either of the other subprojects.
You would therefore want a next action to be continually current on "Rewire basement" and "Finalize landscaping."
If you're not * sure, I'd vote for putting your Big Projects on the "Projects" list and holding the subpieces in your project support How you list material, making sure to include them in your projects and Weekly Review, If that arrangement doesn't feel subprojects is up to quite right, try including the active and independent you; just be sure subprojects as separate entries on your master list.
you know where to There's no perfect system for tracking all your find all the moving projects and subprojects the same way.
to know you have projects and, if they have associated components, where to find the appropriate reminders for them.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS Project Support Materials Project support materials are not project actions, and they're not project reminders.
They're resources to support your actions and thinking about your projects.
Don't Use Support Material for Reminding Typically, people use stacks of papers and thickly stuffed file folders as reminders that (1) they've got a project, and (2) they've got to do something about it.
The problem is that next actions and "Waiting For" items on these projects have usually not been determined and are psychologically still embedded in the stacks and the folders giving them the aura of just more "stuff" that repels its (un)organizer instead of attracting him or her to action.
When you're on the run, in the heat of the activities of the day, files like that are the last thing you'll want to pick up and peruse for actions.
You'll actually go numb to the files and the piles because they don't prompt you to do anything and they simply create more anxiety.
Then the action steps and "Waiting For" items must be put onto their appropriate action reminder lists.
To reiterate, you don't want to use support materials as your primary reminders of what to dothat should be relegated to your action lists.
If, however, the materials contain project plans and overviews in addition to ad hoc archival and reference information, you may want to keep them a little more visibly accessible than you do the pure reference materials in your filing cabinet.
The latter place is fine for support stuff, too, so long as you have the discipline to pull out the file drawer and take a look at the plan every time you do your Weekly Review.
If not, you're better PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO off storing those kinds of project support files in a standing file holder or a separate "Pending" stack-basket on your desk or credenza.
To return to the previous example of moving into a new house, you could have a folder labeled "New House" containing all the plans and details and notes about the landscaping and the kitchen and the basement.
In your Weekly Review, when you came to "Finish new home renovations" on your "Projects" list, you'd pull out the "New House" file and thumb through all your notes to ensure that you weren't missing any possible next actions.
Those actions would then get done, delegated, or deferred onto your action lists, and the folder would be refiled until you needed it again for doing the actions or for your next Weekly Review.
Many people who interact with prospects and clients have attempted to use client folders and/or contact-management software such as Act!
The problem here is that some material is just facts or historical data that needs to be stored as background for when you might be able to use it, and some of what must be tracked is the actions required to move the relationships forward.
The latter can be more effectively organized within your action-lists system.
Client information is just that, and it can be folded into a general-reference file on the client or stored within a client-focused library.
for the single great feature it offers of allowing me to cross-reference general company information and significant interactions with key people within the company.
Organizing Ad Hoc Project Thinking In chapter 3, I suggested that you will often have ideas that you'll want to keep about projects but that are not necessarily next actions.
Most professionals will have several options for how to handle support materials, including attaching notes to a list item, organizing digital information in e-mail and/or databases, and maintaining paper-based files and notes in notebooks.
Attached Notes Most organizing software allows you to attach a digital "note" to a list or calendar entry.
If you're keeping a "Projects" list within the software, you can go to the project you had a thought about, open or attach a "note" to it, and type in your idea.
In any case, you'll need to remember to look at the attachment when you review your project, to make use of the data.
E-mail and Databases E-mails that might contain good information related to your projects can be held in a dedicated e-mail folder (just follow the instructions on pages 152-53 for "@ACTION" and call it something like "@PROJECTS").
You may also find it worthwhile, if you don't have one already, to set up a more rigorous kind of digital database for organizing your thinking on a project or topic.
* It's worth looking into some of the other types of free-form databases that are on the market, tooeven just for your own use.
It's great to be able to cut and paste from the Web or from e-mails and drop data under a topic somewhere or type in your own thoughts.
Be sure, also, to explore the technology and tools that you already havejust learning how to use all the lists and attachments in something like the Palm organizer may provide you with sufficient "back-of-the-envelope" capability.
Simplicity and ease of handling make for a good general-reference filing systemone that lets you feel comfortable about creating a folder for scraps of paper from a meeting.
Pages in Notebooks A great advantage of paper-based loose-leaf notebooks is that you can dedicate a whole page or group of pages to an individual project.
For years I maintained a midsize notebook with a "Projects" list in front and a "Project Support" section toward the back, where I always had some blank pages to capture any random thinking or plans and details about projects on my list.
Each of the methods described above can be effective in organizing project thinking.
The key is that you must consistently look for any action steps inherent in your project notes, and review the notes themselves as often as you think is necessary, given the nature of the project.
I've found a lot of value in capturing these types of thoughts, more for the way it consistently helps my thinking process than because I end up using every idea (most I don't!).
Organizing Nonactionable Data Interestingly, one of the biggest problems with most people's personal management systems is that they blend a few actionable things with a large amount of data and material that has value but no action attached.
Having good, consistent structures with which to manage the nonactionable items in our work and lives is as important as managing our action and project reminders.
When the nonactionable items aren't properly managed, they clog up the whole process.
Unactionable items fall into two large categories: reference materials and reminders of things that need no action now but might at a later date.
Reference Materials Much of what comes across your desk and into your life in general is reference material.
There's no action required, but it's information that you want to keep, for a variety of reasons.
Much of that will be a personal or organizational judgment call based upon legal or logistical concerns or personal preferences.
The only time you should have attention on your reference material is when you need to change your system in some way because you have too much or too little information, given your needs or preferences.
The problem most people have psychologically with all their stuff is that it's still "stuff"that is, they haven't decided what's PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO actionable and what's not.
Once you've made a clean distinction about which is which, what's left as reference should have no pull or incompletion associated with itit's just your library.
As I've increased the size of the hard disk in my computer, I've kept that much more e-mail in my archives.
The more the merrier, as far as I'm concerned, since increasing the volume of pure reference material adds no psychic weight.
The Variety of Reference Systems There are a number of ways to organize reference material, and many types of tools to use.
General-reference filingpaper and e-mail  Large-category filing  Rolodexes and contact managers  Libraries and archives Your filing system General-Reference Filing As I've said, a good filing system is critical for processing and organizing your library of data, stuff.
Ideally you not your reminder will already have set up a general-reference filing sysfor actions, tem as you were processing "in."
You need to feel projects, priorities, comfortable storing even a single piece of paper that you might want to refer to later, and your system must be informal and accessible enough that it's a snap to file it away in your alphabetized general-reference system, right at hand where you work.
should be a simple CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS Most people seem to wind up with 200 to 400 paper-based general-reference files and 30 to 100 e-mail reference folders.
For instance, if you're managing a corporate merger and need to keep hold of a lot of the paperwork, you may want to dedicate two or three whole file cabinets to all the documentation required in the due-diligence process.
Bear in mind that if your "area of focus" has support material that could blend into other "areas of focus," you may run into the dilemma of whether to store the information in general reference or in the specialized reference files.
When you read a great article about wood fencing and want to keep it, does that go in your "Garden" cabinet or in the general system with other information about home-related projects?
As a general rule, it's best to stick with one general-reference system except for a very limited number of discrete topics.
Rolodexes and Contact Managers Much of the information that you need to keep is directly related to people in your network.
You need to track contact information of all sortshome and office phone numbers and addresses, cell-phone numbers, fax numbers, e-mail addresses, and so on.
In a more rigorous professional vein, you may need or want to track hire dates, performance-review dates, goals and objectives, and other potentially relevant data for staff development purposes.
The telephone/address section of most of the organizers sold in the last fifty years is probably (along with the calendar) their most commonly used component.
It's instructive to note that this is purely and simply reference material.
So there's no big mystery about how to organize it, aside from the logistics for your individual needs.
Again, the only problem comes up when people try to make their Rolodexes serve as tools for reminding them about things they need to do.
As long as all the actions relative to people you know have been identified and tracked in your action reminder lists, there's no role for telephone and address systems to fill other than being a neutral address book.
Nothing's perfect in that regard, but as the small digital tools become easier to use and connect to larger databases, you'll be able to have more information at hand with the same or less effort.
Relative to your personal organization and productivity, this is not a core issue, If material is purely so long as all of your projects and actions are in a for reference, the control system that you work with regularly.
That should be put into your personal filing system or your networked computer.
Material needed for those could be archived in departmental files or offsite storage.
Do you see how that personal organization of reference material is simply a logistical issue?
Distinguishing actionable things from nonactionable ones is the key success factor in this arena.
Once you've done that, you have total freedom to manage and organize as much or as little reference material as you want.
These could range from a special trip you might want to take one day, to books you might want to read, to projects you might want to tackle in the next fiscal year, to skills and talents you might want to develop.
They may be review, all of which will work to get them off your some of the most current radar and your mind.
You can put the items interesting and on various versions of "Someday/Maybe" lists or creative things trigger them on your calendar or in a paper-based you'll ever get involved with.
"tickler" system.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO "Someday/Maybe" List It's highly likely that if you did a complete mind-sweep when you were collecting things out of your psychic RAM, you came up with some things you're not sure you want to commit to.
"Learn Spanish," "Get Marcie a horse," "Climb Mt, Washington," and "Build a guest cottage" are typical projects that fall into this category.
If you haven't already done it, I recommend that you create a "Someday/Maybe" list in whatever organizing system you've chosen.
If you acknowledge the power of the imagination to foster changes in perception and performance, it's easy to see how having a "Someday/Maybe" list out in front of your conscious mind could potentially add many wonderful adventures to your life and work.
In addition to your in-basket, there are two rich sources to tap for your "Someday/Maybe" list: your creative imagination and your list of current projects.
to acquire  Trips to take  Organizations to join  Service projects to contribute to  Things to see and do Reassess Your Current Projects Now's a good time to review your "Projects" list from a more elevated perspective (that is, the standpoint of your job and goals) and consider whether you might transfer some of your current commit- What lies in our ments to "Someday/Maybe."
It can be fun to collect these on lists.
These kinds of lists can be a cross between reference and "Someday/Maybe"reference because you can just collect and add to lists of good wines or restaurants or books, to consult as you like; "Someday/Maybe" because you might want to review the listed items on a regular basis to remind yourself to try one or more of them at some point.
In any case, this is another great reason to have an organizing system that makes it easy to capture things that may add value and variety and interest to your lifewithout clogging your mind and work space with undecided, unfinished business.
I personally don't recommend this particular kind of subsystem, because in virtually every case I have come across, the client "held" but didn't "review," and there was numbness and resistance about the stack.
The value of "someday/ maybe" disappears if you don't put your conscious awareness back on it with some consistency.
Also, there's a big difference between something that's managed well, as a "Someday/Maybe" list, and something that's just a catchall bucket for "stuff."
Usually much of that stuff needs to be tossed, some of it needs to go into "Read/Review," some needs to be filed as reference, some belongs on the calendar or in a tickler file (see page 173) for review in a month or perhaps at the beginning of the next quarter, and some actually has next actions on it.
Many times, after appropriately processing someone's "Hold and Review" drawer or file, I've discovered there was nothing left in it!
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS Using the Calendar for Future Options Your calendar can be a very handy place to park reminders of things you might want to consider doing in the future.
One of the three uses of a calendar is for day-specific information.
Here are a few of the myriad things you should consider inserting:  Triggers for activating projects  Events you might want to participate in  Decision catalysts Triggers for Activating Projects If you have a project that you don't really need to think about now but that deserves a flag at some point in the future, you can pick an appropriate date and put a reminder about the project in your calendar for that day.
Regular events that you need to prepare for, such as budget reviews, annual conferences, planning events, or meetings (e.g., when should you add next year's "annual sales conference" to your "Projects" list?)
So figure out when that "closer" time is and put a trigger in your calendar on the appropriate datefor example: "Chamber of Commerce breakfast tomorrow?"
It's OK to decide not (Obviously, external data you need in order to make a to decideas long decision should go on your "Next Actions" or "Waitas you have a ing For" lists.)
net that you can trust to get you to focus on the issue appropriately in the future.
* Some typical decision areas in this category include:  Hire/fire  Merge/acquire/sell/divest  Change job/career *If you're using a group-accessible calendar, you must maintain discretion about these kinds of triggers.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS This is a big topic to devote so little space to, I know, but go ahead and ask yourself, "Is there any major decision for which I should create a future trigger, so I can feel comfortable just 'hanging out' with it for now?"
The "Tickler" File One elegant way to manage nonactionable items that may need an action in the future is the "tickler" file.
I myself have used a tickler file for years and can't imagine being without it.
Essentially the tickler is a simple file-folder system that allows you to distribute paper and other physical reminders in such a way that whatever you want to see on a particular date in the future "automatically" shows up that day in your in-basket.
Then every day of the week, that day's folder is pulled and reviewed.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO While you can (and probably should) utilize staff to handle as much of this as is appropriate, I recommend that, if you can integrate it into your life-style, you maintain your own tickler file.
I use my tickler file to manage my travel tickets and confirmations; paper-based travel directions, agendas, and maps; reminders of event notifications that come in the mail; information about "might-want-to-buy" kinds of things I want to reconsider in the future; and so forth.
Bottom line: the tickler file demands only a one-second-perday new behavior to make it work, and it has a payoff value logarithmically greater than the personal investment.
Setting Up a Tickler File You need forty-three foldersthirtyone daily files labeled "1" through "31," and twelve more labeled with the names of the months of the year.
The daily files are kept in front, beginning with the file for tomorrow's date (if today is October 5, then the first file would be "6").
The succeeding daily files represent the days of the rest of the month ("6" through "31").
Behind the "31" file is the monthly file for the next month ("November"), and behind that are the daily files "1" though "5."
Following that are the rest of the monthly files ("December" through "October").
In the same way, when the next monthly file reaches the front (on October 31 after you empty the daily file, the "November" file will be the next one, with the daily files "1" through "31" behind it), it's emptied into the in-basket and refiled at the back of the monthlies to represent November a year from now.
This is a "perpetual" file, meaning that at any given time it contains files for the next thirty-one days and the next twelve months.
The big advantage of using file folders for your tickler system is that they allow you to store actual documents (the form that needs CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS FILE-FOLDER-STYLE SAMPLE SETUP (OCTOBER 5) to be filled out on a certain day, the memo that needs to be reviewed then, the telephone note that needs action on a specific date, etc.).
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO Checklists: Creative Reminders The last topic in personal system organization that deserves some attention is the care and feeding of checklists, those recipes of potential ingredients for projects, events, and areas of value, interest, and responsibility.
The most creative checklists are often generated at the back end of a good consulting process with a team or company.
Good ones also show up as areas of focus for training staff or hiring into job slots.
When I'm clearing in-baskets with clients and reviewing other things they're concerned about, we often run across little "Memos to Self" like:  Exercise more regularly.
Do more proactive planning for the division.
Keep the client billing process up to date.
First, Clarify Inherent Projects and Actions For much of this kind of "stuff," there is still a project and/or an action that needs to be defined.
"Exercise more regularly" really translates for many people into "Set up regular exercise program" (project) and "Call Sally for suggestions about personal trainers" (real action step).
In such cases, inherent projects and actions still need to be clarified and organized into a personal system.
CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS Blueprinting Key Areas of Work and Responsibility Objectives like "Maintain good physical conditioning" or "Physical health and vitality" may still need to be built into some sort of overview checklist that will be reviewed regularly.
A list of these might contain points like:  Team morale  Processes  Timelines  Staff issues  Workload  Communication PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO All of these items could in turn be included on the lists in your personal system, as reminders to you, as needed, to keep the ship on course, on an even keel.
The More Novel the Situation, the More Control Is Required The degree to which any of us needs to maintain checklists and external controls is directly related to our unfamiliarity with the area of responsibility.
If you've been doing what you're doing for a long time, and there's no pressure on you to change in that area, you probably need minimal external personal organization to stay on cruise control.
Many times you'll want some sort of checklist to help you maintain a focus until you're more familiar with what you're doing.
For instance, when my wife and I decided to create a Checklists can be brand-new structure for a business we'd been highly useful to let involved with for many years, I took on areas of you know what you responsibility I'd never had to deal with before don't need to be namely, accounting, computers, marketing, legal, and concerned about.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS Checklists at All Levels Be open to creating any kind of checklist as the urge strikes you.
Making lists, ad hoc, as they occur to you, is one of the most powerful yet subtlest and simplest procedures that you can install in your life.
To spark your creative thinking, here's a list of some of the topics of checklists I've seen and used over the years:  Personal Affirmations (i.e., personal value statements)  Job Areas of Responsibility (key responsibility areas)  Travel Checklist (everything to take on or do before a trip)  Weekly Review (everything to review and/or update on a weekly basis)  Training Program Components (all the things to handle when putting on an event, front to back)  Clients  Conference Checklist (everything to handle when putting on a conference)  Focus Areas (key life roles and responsibilities)  Key People in My Life/Work (relationships to assess regularly for completion and opportunity development)  Organization Chart (key people and areas of output to manage and maintain)  Personal Development (things to evaluate regularly to ensure personal balance and progress) Get comfortable with checklists, both ad hoc and more permanent.
Appropriately used, they can be a tremendous asset in personal productivity.
If in fact you have now collected everything that represents an open loop in your life and work, processed each one of those items in \ PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO terms of what it means to you and what actions are required, and organized the results into a complete system that holds a current and complete overviewlarge and smallof all your present and "someday" projects, then you're ready for the next phase of implementation in the art of stress-free productivitythe review process.
You must be assured that you're doing what you need to be doing, and that it's OK to be not doing what you're not doing.
Reviewing your system on a regular basis and keeping it current and functional are prerequisites for that kind of control.
If you have a list of calls you must make, for example, the minute that list is not totally current with all the calls you need to make, your brain will not trust the system, and it won't get relief from its lower-level mental tasks.
It will have to take back the job of remembering, processing, and reminding, which, as you should know by now, it doesn't do very effectively.
And it should trigger consistent and appropriate evaluation of your life and work at several horizons.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO A real review process will lead to enhanced and proactive new thinking in key areas of your life and work.
Such thinking emerges from both focused concentration and serendipitous brainstorming, which will be triggered and galvanized by a consistent personal review of your inventory of actions and projects.
What to Look At, When Your personal system and behaviors need to be established in such a way that you can see all the action options you need to see, when you need to see them.
This is really just common sense, but few people actually have their processes and their organization honed to the point where they are as functional as they could be.
When you have access to a phone and any discretionary time, you ought to at least glance at the list of all the phone calls you need to make, and then either direct yourself to the best one to handle or give yourself permission to feel OK about not bothering with any of them.
When you're about to go in for a discussion with your boss or your partner, take a moment to review the outstanding agendas you have with him or her, so you'll know that you're using your time most effectively.
When you need to pick up something at the dry cleaner's, first quickly review all the other errands that you might be able to do en route.
My answer is simply, you need for review, "As much time as I need to to feel comfortable about as long as you're what I'm doing."
What most things at the right people don't realize is that my lists are in one sense time.
Just as you might have Post-its and stacks of phone slips at your workstation, so do I on my "Next Actions" lists.
Assuming that you've completely collected, processed, and organized your stuff, you'll most likely take only a CHAPTER 8 | REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL few brief moments here and there to access your system for dayto-day reminders.
Looking at Your Calendar First Your most frequent review will probably be of your daily calendar, and your daily tickler folder if you're maintaining one, to see the "hard landscape" and assess what has to get done.
Then Your Action Lists After you review all your day- and time-specific commitments and handle whatever you need to about them, your next most frequent area for review will be the lists of all the actions you could possibly do in your current context.
If you're in your office, for instance, you'll look at your lists of calls, computer actions, and inoffice things to do.
This doesn't necessarily mean you will actually be doing anything on those lists; you'll just evaluate them against the flow of other work coming at you to ensure that you make the best choices about what to deal with.
Frankly, if your calendar is trustworthy and your action lists are current, they may be the only things in the system you'll need to refer to more than every couple of days.
There have been many days when I didn't need to look at any of my lists, in fact, because it was clear from the front endmy calendarwhat I wouldn't be able to do.
The Right Review in the Right Context You may need to access any one of your lists at any time.
On the other hand, if your boss pops in for a face-to-face conversation about current realities and priorities, it will be highly functional for you to have your "Projects" list up to date and your "Agenda" list for him or her right at hand.
That's impossible to do, however, if your lists fall too far behind your reality.
You won't be able to fool yourself about this: if your sysTo make tem is out of date, your brain will be forced to fully knowledge engage again at the lower level of remembering.
The many years I've spent Peter F. researching and implementing this methodology with countless people have proved to me that the magic key to the sustainability of the process is the Weekly Review.
We book ourselves back to back in meetings all day, go to after-hours events that generate ideas and commitments we need to deal with, and get embroiled in engagements and projects that have the potential to spin our creative intelligence into cosmic orbits.
It builds in some capturing, reevaluation, and reprocessing time to keep you in balance.
The Weekly Review will also sharpen your intu- your system can process on a daily itive focus on your important projects as you deal basis.
with the flood of new input and potential distractions coming at you the rest of the week.
It's going through the five phases of workflow managementcollecting, processing, organizing, and reviewing all your outstanding involvementsuntil you can honestly say, "I absolutely know right now everything I'm not doing but could be doing if I decided to."
Put it all into your in-basket for processing.
List action items, projects, waiting-fors, calendar events, and someday/ maybes, as appropriate.
File any reference notes and materials.
Be ruthless with yourself, PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO processing all notes and thoughts relative to interactions, projects, new initiatives, and input that have come your way since your last download, and purging those not needed.
Previous Calendar Data Review past calendar dates in detail for remaining action items, reference information, and so on, and transfer that data into the active system.
Capture actions about arrangements and preparations for any upcoming events.
Empty Your Head Put in writing (in appropriate categories) any new projects, action items, waiting-fors, someday/maybes, and so forth that you haven't yet captured.
Review "Projects" (and Larger Outcome) Lists Evaluate the status of projects, goals, and outcomes one by one, ensuring that at least one current kick-start action for each is in your system.
Review "Next Actions"Lists Mark off completed actions.
Review "Waiting For" List Record appropriate actions for any needed follow-up.
Review Any Relevant Checklists Is there anything you haven't done that you need to do?
Review "Someday/Maybe" List Check for any projects that may have become active and transfer them to "Projects."
CHAPTER 8 | REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL Review "Pending" and Support Files Browse through all workin-progress support material to trigger new actions, completions, and waiting-fors.
"Point of view" This review process is common sense, but few is that qulntof us do it as well as we could, and that means as essentially human regularly as we should to keep a clear mind and a solution to information sense of relaxed control.
overload, an intuitive process of The Right Time and Place for the Review reducing things to The Weekly Review is so critical that it behooves you an essential to establish good habits, environments, and tools to relevant and support it.
In Things Done is all about, you won't have to worry too a world of much about making yourself do your reviewyou'll hyperabundant content, point of have to to get back to your personal standards again.
If you have the luxury of an office or work space that can be somewhat isolated from the people and interactions of the day, and if you have anything resembling a typical Mondayto-Friday workweek, I recommend that you block out two hours early every Friday afternoon for the review.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO When you (invariably) uncover actions that require reaching people at work, you'll still have time to do that before they leave for the weekend.
A good friend and client of mine, an executive in the world's largest aerospace company, has his own Sunday-night ritual of relaxing in his home office and processing the hundreds of notes he's generated during his week of back-toback meetings.
Whatever your life-style, you need a weekly regrouping ritual.
If so, leverage the habit by adding into it a higher-altitude review process.
The people who find it hardest to make time for this review are those who have constantly on-demand work and home environments, with zero built-in time or space for regrouping.
The most stressed professionals I have met are the ones who have to be mission-critically reactive at work (e.g., high-level equities traders and chiefs of staff) and then go home to a couple of under-tenyear-old children and a spouse who also works.
If you recognize yourself in that picture, your greatest challenge will be to build in a consistent process of regrouping, when your world is not directly in your face.
For them the biggest problem is how to balance quality thinking and catch-up time with the urgent demands of mission-critical interactions.
The most senior and savvy of them, however, know the value of sacrificing the seemingly urgent for the truly important, and they create their Your best thoughts about work won't islands of time for some version of this process.
sistent reflective time for their work, though, often seem to give short shrift to the more mundane review and catch-up process at the "10,000-foot" level.
Between wall-towall meetings and ambling around your koi pond with a chardonnay at sunset, there's got to be a slightly elevated level of reflection and regrouping required for operational control and focus.
comes, the long-term goals, the visions and princi- while others party.
Are you doing guided integrated what you really want or need to do, from a deeper thinking .
you're giving in to The explicit focus of this book is not at those laziness and no "30,000-" to "50,000+-foot" levels.
How often you ought to challenge yourself with that type of wide-ranging review is something only you can know.
Which brings us to the ultimate point and challenge of all this personal collecting, processing, organizing, and reviewing methodology: It's 9:22 A.M. Wednesday morningwhat do you do?
* As outlined in chapter 2 (pages 48-53), I have found three priority frameworks to be enormously helpful in the context of deciding actions:  The four-criteria model for choosing actions in the moment  The threefold model for evaluating daily work  The six-level model for reviewing your own work *There are various ways to give it all up.
Trusting yourself and the source of your intelligence is a more elegant version of freedom and personal productivity.
The Four-Criteria Model for Choosing Actions in the Moment Remember that you make your action choices based on the following four criteria, in order: | | | | Context Time available Energy available Priority Let's examine each of these in the light of how you can best structure your systems and behaviors to take advantage of its dynamics.
As I've said, you should always organize your action reminders by context"Calls," "At Home," "At Computer," "Errands," "Agenda for Joe," "Agenda for Staff Meeting," and so on.
Since context is the first criterion that comes into play in your choice of actions, context-sorted lists prevent unnecessary CHAPTER 9 | DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES reassessments about what to do.
If you have a bunch of things to do on one to-do list, but you actually can't do many of them in the same context, you force yourself to continually keep reconsidering all of them.
If you're stuck in traffic, and the only actions you can take are calls on your cell phone, you want to be able to pull out just your "Calls" list.
Your action lists should fold in or out, based on what you could possibly do at any time.
A second real benefit accrues from organizing all your actions by the physical context needed: that in itself forces you to make the all-important determination about the next physical action on your stuff.
All of my action lists are set up this way, so I have to decide on the very next physical action before I can know which list to put an item on (is this something that requires the computer?
action list (i.e., one not specific to a context) often let themselves slide in the next-action decision, too.
I frequently encourage clients to structure their list categories early on as they're processing their in-baskets, because that automatically grounds their projects in the real things that need to get done to get them moving.
A total-life action-reminder inventory will give you maximum information about what you need to do, and make it much easier to match your actions to the windows you have.
If your lists have only the "big" or "important" things on them, PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO no item listed may be possible to handle in a ten-minute period.
Energy Available Although you can increase your energy level at times We all have times by changing your context and redirecting your focus, when we think you can do only so much.
The tail end of a day taken more effectively, up mostly by a marathon budget-planning session is and times when probably not the best time to call a prospective client we should not be or start drafting a performance-review policy.
might be better to call the airline to change a reservaDaniel Cohen tion, process some expense receipts, or skim a trade journal.
Just as having all your next-action options available allows you to take advantage of various time slots, knowing about everything you're going to need to process and do at some point will allow you to match productive activity with your vitality level.
This is one of the best reasons for having very clean edges to your personal management system: it There is no reason makes it easy to continue doing productive activity not to be highly when you're not in top form.
If you're in a low-energy productive, even mode and your reading material is disorganized, your when you're not in receipts are all over the place, your filing system is top form.
chaotic, and your in-basket is dysfunctional, it just CHAPTER 9 | DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES seems like too much work to do to find and organize the tasks at hand; so you simply avoid doing anything at all and then you feel even worse.
These first three criteria for choosing action (context, time, and energy) bespeak the need for a complete next-action reminder system.
If it is, you can operate much more "in your zone" and choose from delineated actions that fit the situation.
Priority Given the context you're in and the time and energy you have, the obvious next criterion for action choice is relative priority: "Out of all my remaining options, what is the most important thing for me to do?"
"How do I decide my priorities?"
That process invariably includes an often complex interplay with the goals, values, and directions of your organization and of the other significant people in your life, and with the importance of those relationships to you.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO The Threefold Model for Evaluating Daily Work Setting priorities assumes that some things will be more important than others, but important relative to what?
In this context, the answer is, to your workthat is, the job you have accepted from yourself and/or from others.
They're about defining your work.
Keep in mind that though much of this methodology will be within the arena of your professional focus, I'm using "work" in the universal sense, to mean anything you have a commitment to making happen, personally as well as professionally.
These days, daily work activity itself presents a relatively new type of challenge to most professionals, something that it's helpful to understand as we endeavor to build the most productive systems.
As I explained earlier, during the course of the workday, at any point in time, you'll be engaged in one of three types of activities:  Doing predefined work  Doing work as it shows up  Defining your work You may be doing things on your action lists, doing things as they come up, or processing incoming inputs to determine what work that needs to be done, either then or later, from your lists.
You have a major strategic-planning session coming up in two days, for which you have yet to formulate your ideas.
And your boss hinted as you passed her earlier in the hall that she'd like your thoughts on the memo she e-mailed you yesterday, before this afternoon's three o'clock meeting.
If you're still keeping things in your head, and if get wrapped up in you're still trying to capture only the "critical" stuff on the urgent demands of the moment than your lists, I suggest that the answer is no.
I've noticed that people are actually more com- to deal with your inbasket, e-mail, and fortable dealing with surprises and crises than they the rest of your are taking control of processing, organizing, reviewopen loops.
It's easy to get sucked into "busy" and "urgent" mode, especially when you have a lot of unprocessed and relatively out-of-control work on your desk, in your e-mail, and on your mind.
In fact, much of our life and work just shows up in the moment, and it usually becomes the priority when it does.
It's indeed true for most professionals that the nature of their job requires them to be instantly available to handle new work as it appears in many forms.
But the angst PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO begins to mount when the other actions on your lists are not reviewed and renegotiated by you or between you and everyone else.
The constant sacrifices of not doing the work you have defined on your lists can be tolerated only if you know what you're not doing.
That requires regular processing of your in-basket (defining your work) and consistent review of complete lists of all your predetermined work.
If choosing to do work that just showed up instead of doing work you predefined is a conscious choice, based on your best call, that's playing the game the best way you can.
Most people, however, have major improvements to make in how they clarify, manage, and renegotiate their total inventory of projects and actions.
Too often the stress and lowered effectiveness are blamed on the "surprises."
If you know what you're doing, and what you're not doing, surprises are just another opportunity to be creative and excel.
In addition, when the in-basket and the action lists get ignored for too long, random things lying in them tend to surface as emergencies later on, adding more ad hoc work-as-it-shows-up to fuel the fire.
It's easy to get seduced into not-quite-so-critical stuff that is right at hand, especially if your in-basket and your personal organization are out of control.
Too often "managing by wandering around" is an excuse for getting away from amorphous piles of stuff.
This is where the need for knowledge-work athletics really shows up.
But when you've developed the skill and, habits of processing input rapidly into a rigorously defined system, it becomes CHAPTER 9 I DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES much easier to trust your judgment calls about the dance of what to do, what to stop doing, and what to do instead.
While you're processing your inbasket, for example, your assistant comes in to tell you about a situation that needs immediate atten- To ignore the tion.
No sweatyour tray is still there, with every- unexpected (even if thing still to be processed in one stack, ready to be it were possible) picked up again when you can get back to it.
While would be to live you're on hold on the phone, you can be reviewing without your action lists and getting a sense of what you're opportunity, spontaneity, and going to do when the call is done.
If you stop to talk to someone in his or her office, you're not working off your lists or processing incoming stuff.
How long can you let your in-basket go unprocessed and all your stuff unreviewed and trust that you're making good decisions about what to do?
People often complain about the interruptions that prevent them from doing their work.
When you become elegant at dispatching what's coming in and are organized enough to take advantage of the "weird time" windows that show up, you can switch between one task and the other rapidly.
You can be processing e-mails while you're on hold PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Do ad hoc work as it shows up, not because it is the path of least resistance, but because it is the thing you need to do, vis-a-vis all the rest.
And ultimately, in order to know whether you should stop what you're doing and do something else, you'll need to have to have a good sense of what your job requires and how that fits into the other contexts of your life.
The Six-Level Model for Reviewing Your Own Work The six levels of work as we saw in chapter 2 (pages 51-53) may be thought of in terms of altitude:  50,000+feet: Life  40,000 feet: Three- to five-year visions  30,000 feet: One- to two-year goals  20,000 feet: Areas of responsibility  10,000 feet: Current projects  Runway: Current actions It makes sense that each of these levels should enhance and align with the ones above it.
In other words, your priorities will sit in a hierarchy from the top down.
Ultimately, if the phone call you're supposed to make clashes with your life purpose or values, to be in sync with yourself you won't make it.
If your job structure CHAPTER 9 | DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES doesn't match up with where you need to be a year from now, you should rethink how you've framed your areas of focus and responsibilities, if you want to get where you're going most efficiently.
This particular deal would give you the opportunity to move up in the sales force (job goal) because of the new market your company wants to penetrate (organization vision).
Your work is to And that would get you closer to the way you want to discover your work and then with all be living, both financially and professionally (life).
So you create a business for yourself (vision), with some short-term key operational objectives (job goal).
That gives you some critical roles you need to fulfill to get it rolling (responsibility), with some immediate outcomes to achieve (projects).
On each of those projects you'll have things you need to do, as soon as you can do them (next actions).
The healthiest approach for relaxed control and inspired productivity is to manage all the levels in a balanced fashion.
What are your projects relative to your kids?
These are all open loops in your psyche, though often it takes deeper and more introspective processes to identify the bigger goals and subtler inclinations.
I'm always PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO The best place to amazed at the power of clear observation simply about what's going on, what's true.
Finding out the you are with what exact details of your personal finances, clarifying the you have.
historical data about the company you're buying, or Charles getting the facts about who really said what to whom in an interpersonal conflict can be constructive, if not downright healing.
Getting things done, and feeling good about it, means being willing to recognize, acknowledge, and appropriately manage all the things that have your consciousness engaged.
Mastering the art of stress-free productivity requires it.
What kind of job and personal relationships clarify your would support that direction?
What key things would priorities at any you need to put in place and make happen right now, level.
In truth, you can approach your priorities from any level, at any time.
I always have something that I could do constructively to enhance my awareness and focus on each level.
I'm never lacking in more visions to elaborate, goals to reassess, projects to identify or create, or actions to decide on.
Because everything will ultimately be driven by the priorities of the level above it, any formulation of your priorities would obviously most efficiently begin at the top.
For example, if you spend time prioritizing your work and then later discover that it's not the work you think you ought to be doing, you may have "wasted" time and energy that could have been better spent defin202 CHAPTER 9 1 DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES ing the next job you really want.
The problem is that without a sense of control at the implementation levels (current projects and actions), and without inner trust in your own ability to manage those levels appropriately, trying to manage yourself from the top down often creates frustration.
I've coached people from the top down, from both directions, and in terms of lasting value, I when the bottom is can honestly say that getting someone in control of out of control, may the details of his or her current physical world, and be the least effective approach.
then elevating the focus from there, has never missed.
The primary reason to work from this bottomup direction is that it clears the psychic decks to begin with, allowing your creative attention to focus on the more meaningful and elusive visions that you may need to challenge yourself to identify.
Also, this particular method has a high degree of flexibility and freedom, and it includes a thinking and organizing practice that is universal and effective no matter what it's focused on.
Change your mind, and this process will help you adjust with maximum speed.
While the "50,000-foot level" is obviously the most important context within which to set priorities, experience has shown me that when we understand and implement all the levels of work in which we are engaged, especially the runway and 10,000-foot levels, we gain greater freedom and resources to do the bigger work that we're all about.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO Runway The first thing to do is make sure your action lists are complete, which in itself can be quite a task.
Those who focus on gathering and objectifying all of those items discover that there are many they've forgotten, misplaced, or just not recognized.
Aside from your calendar, if you don't have at least fifty next actions and waiting-fors, including all the agendas for people and meetings, I would be skeptical about whether you really had all of them.
When you've finished getting this level of control current, you'll automatically have a more grounded sense of immediate priorities, which is almost impossible to achieve otherwise.
Taking the inventory of your current work at all levels will automatically produce greater focus, alignment, and sense of priorities.
If you make a complete list of all of the things you want to have happen in your life and work at this level, you'll discover that there are actions you need to do that you hadn't realized.
Very few people have this clear data defined and available to themselves in some objective form.
For most of our coaching clients, it takes ten to fifteen hours of collecting, processing, and organizing to get to the point of trusting the thoroughness of their inventory.
20,000 Feet This is the level of "current job responsibilities."
Professionally, this would relate to your current position and work.
Personally, it would include the roles you've taken on in your family, in your community, and of course with yourself as a functioning person.
If you've done any kind of personal goal-setting and values-clarifying exercises in the past and still have any materials you created then, add those to the mix.
You might like to separate this into "Professional" and "Personal" sublists, in which case you'll want to use them both equally for a consistent review This is one of the most useful checklists you can create for your own self-management.
areas of your life and work, this should be used as a trigger for potential new projects every one to three months.
You probably have somewhere between four and seven key areas of responsibility in your work, and a similar number personally.
Your job may include things like staff development, systems design, long-range planning, administrative support, marketing, and scheduling, or responsibility for facilities, fulfillment, quality PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PAHT TWO control, asset management, and so on.
The rest of your life might entail areas of focus such as parenting, partnering, church, health, community service, home management, financial management, self-development, creative expression, and so forth.
The operational purpose of the "Areas of Focus" list is to ensure that you have all your projects and next actions defined, so you can manage your responsibilities appropriately.
If you were to create an accounting of those and evaluate them objectively, in terms of what you're doing and should be doing, you'll undoubtedly uncover projects you need to add to your "Projects" list.
You may, in reviewing the list, decide that some areas are just fine and are being taken care of.
Upon reflection, most realize they need to add a project or two in that area, such as "Upgrade our performancereview process."
A discussion of "priorities" would have to incorporate all of these levels of current agreements between yourself and others.
If you get this "job description" checklist in play and keep it current, you'll probably be more relaxed and in control than most people in our culture.
30,000 to 50,000+ Feet Whereas the three lower levels have mostly to do with the current state of thingsyour actions, projects, and areas of responsibilityfrom here up the factors of the future and your direction and intentions are primary.
("30,000 feet") to a three-year vision for your career and personal net worth ("40,000 feet") to intuiting your life purpose and how to maximize its expression ("50,000+ feet").
Also, since Getting Things Done is more about the art of implementation than about how to define goals and vision, I won't offer a rigorous examination here.
But by its very nature this investigation can broach potentially deep and complex arenas, which could include business strategy, organization development, career planning, and life direction and values.
For our purposes, the focus is on capturing what motivators exist for you in current reality that determine the inventory of what your work actually is, right now.
Even so, there are probably some things you can identify right now that can help you get current in your own thinking about your work and what's important in it.
If you were to intuitively frame a picture of what you think you might be doing twelve to eighteen months from now, or what the nature of your job will look like at that point, what would that trigger?
At this level, which is subtler, there may be things personally you need to let go of, and people and systems that may need to be developed to allow the transition.
And as the job itself is a moving target, given the shifting sands of the professional world these days, there may need to be projects defined to ensure viability of the outputs in your area.
In the personal arena, this is where you would want to consider things like: "My career is going to stagnate unless I assert my PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO own goals more specifically to my boss (or my boss's boss)."
Or "What new things are my children going to be doing next year, and what do I need to do differently because of that?"
How is your personal life moving along?
What is your organization doing relative to changes in the environment, and what impact does that have on you?
If you're involved in anything that has a future of longer than a year (marriage, kids, a career, a company, an art form), you would do well to think about what you might need to be doing to manage things along that vector.
Questions to ask yourself here are:  What are the longer-term goals and objectives in my organization, and what projects do I need to have in place related to them to fulfill my responsibilities?
What longer-term goals and objectives have I set for myself, and what projects do I need to have in place to make them happen?
What other significant things are happening that could affect my options about what you I'm doing?
CHAPTER 9 | DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES Here are some examples of the kinds of issues that show up at this level of conversation:  The changing nature of your job, given the shifting priorities of the company.
You see yourself doing a different kind of job a year from now, and you need to make a transition out of the one you have while exploring the options for a transfer or promotion.
You see a lot of major international travel looming on the horizon for you, and given your life-style preferences, you need to consider how to readjust your career plans.
Life-style preferences and changing needs.
As your kids get older, your need to be at home with them is diminishing, and your interest in investment and retirement planning is growing.
What is the core DNA of your existence, personally and/or organizationally, that drives your choices.
This is the "big picture" stuff with which hundreds of books and gurus and models are devoted to helping you grapple.
You can have all the other levels of your life and work shipshape, defined, and organized to a T. Still, if you're the slightest bit off course in terms of what at the deepest level you want or are called to be doing, you're going to be uncomfortable.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Getting Priority Thinking Off Your Mind Take at least a few minutes, if you haven't already done so, to jot down some informal notes about things that occurred to you while you've been reading this chapter.
Then process those notes.
Perhaps you want to continue accumulating more of this kind of future thinking and would like to do the exercise with more formalityfor example, by drafting a new business plan with your partners, designing and writing out your idea of a dream life with your spouse, creating a more specific career map for the next three years for yourself, or just getting a personal coach who can lead you through those discussions and thought processes.
If so, put that outcome on your "Projects" list, and decide the next action.
With that done, you may want to turn your focus to developmental thinking about specific projects that have been identified but not fleshed out as fully as you'd like.
You'll want to ensure that you're set up for that kind of "vertical" processing.
That gets us back to refining and energizing our project planning.
The Need for More Informal Planning After years of working with thousands of professionals down in the trenches, I can safely say that virtually all of us could be doing more planning, more informally and more often, about our projects and our lives.
I've discovered that the biggest improvement opportunity in planning does not consist of techniques for the highly elaborate and complex kinds of project organizing that professional project managers sometimes use (like GANTT charts).
Most of the people who need those already have them, or at least have access to the training and software required to learn about them.
This is why my approach tends to be every successful bottom-up.
If you feel out of control with your curproject looks like a rent actionable commitments, you'll resist focused disaster.
planning.
If you have systems and habits ready to leverage your ideas, your productivity can expand exponentially.
In chapter 3, I covered in some detail the five phases of project planning that take something from the idea stage into physical reality.
You need to set up What follows is a compilation of practical tips systems and tricks and techniques to facilitate the natural, informal that get you to think planning processes I recommend.
Although these about your projects suggestions are all based on common sense, they're and situations more not followed nearly as frequently as they could be.
Most of the outcomes you have identified for your "Projects" list will not need any kind of front-end planning, other than the sort you do in your head, quickly and naturally, to come up with a next action on them.
The only planning needed for "Get car inspected," for example, would be to decide to check the phone book for the nearest inspection location and call and set up a time.
There are two types of projects, however, that deserve at least some sort of planning activity: (1) those that still have your attention even after you've determined their next actions, and (2) those CHAPTER 10 | GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL about which potentially useful ideas and supportive detail just show up.
The first typethe projects that you know have other things about them that must be decided on and organizedwill need a more detailed approach than just identifying a next action.
For these you'll need a more specific application of one or more of the other four phases of the natural planning model: purpose and principles, vision/outcome, brainstorming, and/or organizing.
The second typethe projects for which ideas just show up, ad hoc, on a beach or in a car or in a meetingneed to have an appropriate place into which these associated ideas can be captured.
Projects That Need Next Actions About Planning There are probably a few projects you can think of right now, off the top of your head, that you know you want to get more objectified, fleshed out, and under control.
Or you've just inherited the job of coordinating the annual associates' conference, and you've got to get it organized as soon as possible so you can start delegating significant pieces.
If you haven't done it already, get a next action now that will start the planning process for each of these, and put it on the appropriate action list.
Then proceed with further planning steps.
Typical Planning Steps The most common types of planning-oriented actions will be your own brainstorming and organizing, setting up meetings, and gathering information.
Brainstorming Some of the projects that have your attention right now will require you to do your own free-form thinking; this is especially true of those for which you were not clear about what PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO the next action would be when you made that decision.
These should all have a next action, such as "Draft ideas re X."
For me this next action would go either on my "At Computer" list or on "Anywhere" (because I can draw mind-maps wherever I am, as long as I have pen and paper).
Organizing You may have some projects for which you have already collected notes and miscellaneous support materials, and you just need to sort through them and get them into a more structured form.
In this case, your next action would likely be "Organize Project X notes."
If you have to be in your office to do that (because that's where the files are, and you don't want to carry them around), that action should go on your "At Office" action list.
If you're carrying the project notes around with you in a folder, or in a portable organizer or on a laptop, then the "Organize .
action list if you're going to do it by hand, or on "At Computer" if you're going to use a word processor, outliner, or project-planning software.
One of the greatest blocks to organizational productivity is the lack of decision by a senior person about the necessity of a meeting, and with whom, to move an important issue forward.
That usually means sending an e-mail to the whole group or to an assistant to get it calendared, or making a phone call to the first person to nail down a time.
Or CHAPTER 10 | GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL you need to look through the files you just inherited from last year's conference ("Review Associate Conference archive files").
Random Project Thinking Don't lose any ideas about projects that could potentially be useful.
If these aren't specifically next actions that can go directly on your action lists, you'll still need to capture and organize them somewhere that makes sense.
Of course the most critical tools for ensuring that nothing gets lost is your collection systemyour in-basket, pad, and paper (or equivalents) at work and at home, and in a portable version (an index card) while you're out and about.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Thinking Tools One of the great secrets to getting ideas and increasing your productivity is utilizing the function-follows-form phenomenon great tools can trigger good thinking.
(I've come up with some of my most productive thoughts when Luck affects playing with my Palm organizer in an airport, waiteverything.
your hook always If you aren't writing anything down, it's be cast; in the extremely difficult to stay focused on anything for stream where you more than a few minutes, especially if you're by yourleast expect it there self.
Give fortable letting myself think about projects and yourself a context situations.
for capturing Conversely, I have done some great thinking thoughts, and and planning at times just because I wanted to use thoughts will occur my nice-looking, smooth-writing ballpoint pen!
Legal pads work well because you can easily tear off pages with ideas and notes and toss Where is your them into your in-basket until you get a chance to process them.
Keep it of your informal mind-maps, and you can put those closer.
Even if you erase your thoughts after a few minutes, just the act of writing them down facilitates a constructive thinking process like nothing else.
(I've found it immensely helpful at times to draw informal diagrams and notes on paper tablecloths, place mats, or even napkins in restaurants, if I didn't have my own pad of paper at hand.)
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO The Computer Many times I like to think on my laptop, in my word processor.
Much as a pen and paper in front of you supports brainstorming, having good tools and places for organizing project details facilitates the more linear planning that many projects need.
Create File Folders or Loose-Leaf Pages as Needed A good general-reference filing system, right at hand and easy to use, is not only critical to manage the general workflow process, but highly functional for project thinking as well.
Often a project begins to emerge when it's triggered by relevant data, notes, and miscellaneous materials, and for this reason, you'll want to create a folder for a topic as soon as you have something to put in it.
If your filing system is too formal (or nonexistent), you'll probably miss many opportunities to generate a project focus sufficiently early.
As soon as you return from that first meeting with your initial notes about a topic that has just emerged on the horizon, create a file and store them in it right away (after you have gleaned any next actions, of course).
Many times, in coaching clients, I find that the mere act of CHAPTER 10 | GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL creating a file for a topic into which we can organize random notes and potentially relevant materials gives them a significantly improved sense of control.
While some filing bad ideas, you projects may later deserve a whole tabbed section or probably don't have even an entire notebook of their own, they don't start one for filing good ones, either.
And most of your projects may need only a page or two to hold the few ideas you need to track.
For the most part, the applications that are specifically designed for project organizing are way too complex, with too much horsepower to really be functional for 98 percent of what most people need to manage.
They're appropriate only for the very small percentage of the professional world that actually needs them.
The rest of us usually find bits and pieces of applications more informal and project-friendly.
As I've noted, I have never seen any two projects that needed the same amount of detailing and structure to get them under control.
Digital Outlining Most of what anyone needs to structure his or her thinking about projects can be found in any kind of application that has a simple hierarchical outlining function.
I used to use a Symantec program called Grandview, and now I often use Microsoft Word for just this kind of project planning.
Here's a piece of an outline I created for one of our own planning sessions: PRACTICIN The great thing about outlining applications is that they can be as complex or as simple as required.
There are numerous software programs that provide this kind of basic hierarchical structuring.
Until you can stop focusing on how to use the program, you'll resist booting it up and using it to think and organize.
It doesn't really matter where you put this kind of thinking, so long as it's easily accessible so you can input and review it as needed.
Brainstorming Applications Several applications have been developed specifically to facilitate the brainstorming process.
It had some useful features, but me, I've gone back to paper and cool pen for the kind of rapid, informal thinking I usually need to do.
The slick brainstorming-capture tools, like electronic whiteboards and digital handwriting-copying gear, ultimately will probably not be as successful as the manufacturers hoped.
There are significant differences among collecting and processing and organizing, and different tools are usually required for them.
You might as well dump ideas into a word processor.
Project-Planning Applications As I've mentioned, most projectplanning software is too rigorous for the majority of the project thinking and planning we need to do.
When they're used successfully, they're usually highly customized to fit very specific requirements for the company or the industry.
Attaching Digital Notes If you are using a digital organizer, much of the project planning you need to capture outside your head can in fact be satisfactorily managed in an attached note field.
Just ensure that you review the attachment appropriately to make it useful.
Just as your "Next Actions" lists need to be up-to-date, so, too, does your "Projects" list.
That done, give yourself a block of time, ideally between one and three hours, to handle Clear the deck, as much of the "vertical" thinking about each project create a context, as you can.
and do some At the very least, right now or as soon as possicreative project ble, take those few of your projects that you have the thinking.
You'll then most attention on or interest in right now and do be way ahead of some thinking and collecting and organizing on most people.
You may come up with some simple bullet-point headings to attach as a Let our advance "note" in your software organizer.
advance thinking The key is to get comfortable with having and and planning.
And to acquire the habit of focusing  your energy constructively, on intended outcomes Winston and open loops, before you have to.
When people with whom you interact notice that without fail you receive, process, and organize in an airtight manner the exchanges and agreements they have with you, they begin to trust you in a unique way.
Such is the power of capturing placeholders for anything that is incomplete or unprocessed in your life.
It noticeably enhances your mental well-being and improves the quality of your communications and relationships, both personally and professionally.
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE The Personal Benefit How did it feel to go through the collecting and downloading activity?
If you're like most people who go through the full collection process, you probably felt some form of anxiety.
Totally opposite emotional states showing up as you're doing a single exercise, almost at the same timeanxiety and relief; overwhelmed and in control.
When you understand the source of your negative feelings about all your stuff, you'll discover, as I did, the way to get rid of them.
And if you experienced any positive feelings from collecting your stuff, you actually began the process of eliminating the negativity yourself.
anxiety and guilt Agreements you've made with yourself.
Don't Make the Agreement It probably felt pretty good to take a bunch of your old stuff, decide that you weren't going to do anything with it, and just toss it into the trash.
If you didn't care so much about things being up to a certain THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE levelyour parenting, your school system, your team's morale, the software codeyou'd have fewer things to do.
Maintaining an objective inventory Another client, an entrepreneur in the personal of your work makes coaching business, recently told me that making an it much easier to inventory of his work had eliminated a huge amount say no with of worry and stress from his life.
Not being aware of all you have to do is *It has been a popular concept in the self-help world that focusing on your values will simplify your life.
But don't kid yourselfthe more you focus on them, the more things you're likely to feel responsible for taking on.
Complete the Agreement Of course, another way to get rid of the negative feelings about your stuff is to just finish it and be able to mark it off as done.
If you've begun Out of the strain of to complete less-than-two-minute actions as they the doing, into the surface in your life, I'm sure you can attest to the psy- peace of the done.
Most of my clients feel fantastic -Julia Louis after just a couple of hours of processing their piles, Woodruff just because of how many things they accomplish using the two-minute rule.
One of your better weekends may be spent just finishing up a lot of little errands and tasks that have accumulated around your house and in your personal life.
How It's a lot easier would you feel if your list and your stack were to complete totallyand successfullycompleted?
You'd feel so good about finishing all your stuff you'd likely take on bigger, more ambitious things to do.
Not only that, but if you have a boss, what do you think he or THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE she is going to do, after noticing the high levels of competency and productivity you're demonstrating?
It's the catch-22 of professional development: the better you get, the better you'd better get.
So, since you're not going to significantly lower your standards, or stop creating more things to do, you'd better get comfortable with the third option, if you want to keep from stressing yourself out.
Now, given my new priorities, I decide I'm not going to meet you Thursday at four.
Do you understand yet why getting all your It is the act of stuff out of your head and in front of you makes you forgiveness that feel better?
Because you automatically renegotiate opens up the only your agreements with yourself when you look at possible way to them, think about them, and either act on them that think creatively very moment or say, "No, not now."
The fact that you can't remember an agreement Father you made with yourself doesn't mean that you're not holding yourself liable for it.
That means that as soon as you tell yourself that you should do something, if you file it only in your shortterm memory, there's a part of you that thinks you should be doing it all the time.
And that means that as soon as you've given yourself two things to do, and filed them only in your head, CHAPTER 11 I THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT you've created instant and automatic stress and failure, because you can't do them both at the same time.
you ought to clean and organize.
If you want to shut that voice up, you have three options for dealing with your agreement with yourself: 1 | Lower your standards about your garage (you may have done that already).
Then, when you review that list weekly and you see that item, you can tell yourself, "Not this week."
If you're holding something only internally, it will be a broken agreement if you're not moving on it in the moment.
That means it must be captured, objectified, and reviewed regularly in full conscious awareness so that you can put it where it belongs in your self-management arena.
The reason to collect everything is not that everything is equally important, it's that it's not.
Incompletions, uncollected, take on a dull sameness in the sense of the pressure they create and the attention they tie up.
You'll feel better collecting anything that you haven't collected yet.
When will you know how much you have left in your head to collect?
If some part of you is even vaguely aware that you don't have it all, you can't really know what percentage you have collected.
If you're conscious, your mind will always be focusing on something.
But if it's focusing on only one thing at a time, without distraction, you'll be in your "zone."
You want to be adding value as you think about projects and people, not simply reminding yourself they exist.
It takes focus and a change of habit to train yourself to recognize and download even the smallest agreements with yourself as they're created in your mind.
Doing the collection process as fully as you can, and then incorporating the behavior of capturing all the new things as they emerge, will be empowering and productive.
I've lived with the standards of clear psychic RAM and hard, clean edges on in-baskets for more than two decades now.
When a note sits idle in someone's in-basket unprocessed, or when he or she nods "yes, I will" in a conversation THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE but doesn't write anything down, my "uh-oh" bell rings.
I need to trust that any request or relevant inforBailing water in a mation I put on a voice-mail, in an e-mail, in a conleaky boat diverts versation, or in a written note will get into the other energy from rowing person's system and that it will be processed and the boat.
organized, soon, and available for his or her review as an option for action.
If the recipient is managing voice-mails but not e-mail and paper, I have now been hamstrung to use only his or her trusted medium.
I especially notice this when I walk around organizations where in-baskets are either nonexistent, or overflowing and obviously long unprocessed.
It's hardly even a conscious concern, and everyone's attention is more focused.
The same is true in families that have instituted in-basketsfor the parents, the children, the nanny, the housekeeper, or anyone else with whom family members frequently interact.
People often grimace when I tell them that my wife, Kathryn, and I put things in each other's in-baskets, even when we're sitting within a few feet of each other; to them it seems "cold and mechanical."
Unfortunately, you can't legislate personal systems.
I hope I have described a way to relate to renegotiate our relatively new knowledge-based world that gives agreements about room for everyone to have a lot more to do than he or what everyone is she can do.
The critical issue will be to facilitate a not doing.
constant renegotiation process with all involved, so they feel OK about what they're not doing.
That's real knowledge work, at a more sophisticated level.
But there's little hope of getting there without having bulletproof collection systems in play.
Remember, you can't renegotiate an agreement with yourself that you can't remember you made.
When groups of people collectively adopt the 100 percent collection standard, they have a tight ship to sail.
It doesn't mean they're sailing in the right direction, or even that they're on the right ship; it just means that the one they're on, in the direction it's going, is doing that with the most efficient energy it can.
The Power of the Next-Action Decision I HAVE A personal mission to make "What's the next action?"
part of the global thought process.
I envision a world in which no meeting or discussion will end, and no interaction cease, without a clear determination of whether or not some action is needed and if it is, what it will be, or at least who has responsibility for it.
I envision organizations adopting a standard that anything that lands in anyone's "ten acres" will be evaluated for action required, and the resulting decisions managed appropriately.
Imagine the freedom that would allow to focus attention on bigger issues and opportunities.
Over the years I have noticed an extraordinary When a culture shift in energy and productivity whenever individuadopts "What's the als and groups installed "What's the next action?"
as next action?"
automatic increase One of the greatest challenges you may in energy, encounter is that once you have gotten used to productivity, clarity, "What's the next action?"
for yourself and those and focus.
There's a great difference, however, between making that decision when things show up and doing it when they blow up.
The Source of the Technique I learned this simple but extraordinary next-action technique twenty years ago from a longtime friend and managementconsulting mentor of mine, Dean Acheson (no relation to the former secretary of state).
Dean had spent many prior years consulting with executives and researching what was required to free the psychic logjams of many of them about projects and situations they were involved in.
The results were so immediate and so profound for the executive that Dean continued for years to perfect a methodology using that same question to process the in-basket.
It never fails to greatly improve both the productivity and the peace of mind of the user to determine what the next physical action is that will move something forward.
Creating the Option of Doing How could something so simple be so powerful"What's the next action?"
To help answer that question, I invite you to revisit for a moment your mind-sweep list (see page 113).
Or at least to think about all the projects that are probably sitting around in your THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE psyche.
If you haven't known for sure whether you needed to make a call, send an e-mail, look up something, or buy an item at the store as the very next thing to move on, it hasn't been getting done.
What's ironic is that it would likely require only about ten seconds of thinking to figure out what the next action would be for almost everything on your list.
"So what's the next action?"
That's about how much time is required to decide what the "doing" would look like on almost everything.
It's just the few seconds of focused thinking that most people have not yet done about most of their stuff.
Because in that state of mind, the last thing in the world he felt like doing was considering all his projects, including getting tires, and what their next actions were.
If he gets that next-action thinking done, then, when he happens to have fifteen minutes before a meeting, with a phone at hand, and his energy at about 4.2 out of 10, he can look at the list of options of things to do and be delighted to see "Call tire store CHAPTER 12 | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION for prices" on it.
"That's something I can do and com- The secret of plete successfully!"
he'll think, and then he'll actually be getting ahead is motivated to make the call, just to experience the "win" getting started.
In this context he'd be incapable of getting started is breaking your starting a large proposal draft for a client, but he has complex sufficient resources for punching phone numbers and overwhelm ing getting simple information quickly.
and then starting Defining what real doing looks like, on the most on the first one.
basic level, and organizing placeholder reminders Mark Twain that we can trust, are master keys to productivity enhancement.
Often even the simplest things are stuck because we haven't made a final decision yet about the next action.
People in my seminars often have things on their lists like "Get a tune-up for the car."
Is "Get a tune-up" a next action?
"So, what's the next action?"
We glance at the project, potentially infinite and some part of us thinks, "I don't quite have all the gap between current reality and what you pieces between here and there."
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES | PART THREE "So, what's the next action?"
So the next action really is "Call Fred for the number of the garage."
Did you notice how many steps had to be tracked back before we actually got to the real next action on this project?
Most people have many things just like that on their lists.
Why Bright People Procrastinate the Most It's really the smartest people who have the highest number of undecided things in their lives and on their lists.
Your body was actually trying to process citric acid!
CHAPTER 12 I THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION If your body responds to the pictures you give it, how are you likely to feel physically when you think about, say, doing your taxes?
Are you sending yourself "easy," "let's go," completion, success, and "I'm a winner!"
Because their sensitivity gives them the capability of producing in their I am an old man minds lurid nightmare scenarios about what might and have known a be involved in doing the project, and all the negative great many consequences that might occur if it weren't done per- troubles, but most of them never fectly!
Most of the executives I work with have at least several big, complex, and amorphous THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE projects stacked either on a credenza or on a mental shelf.
There always seem to be hobgoblin thoughts lurking inside them "If Ceasing negative we don't look at or think about the projects, maybe imaging will always they'll stay quiet!"
The alcohol is depressing somethingit's shutting down the negative self-talk and uncomfortable visions that are going on in these folks' minds.
Of course my energy will increase if I stop depressing myself with overwhelming pictures of not handling something successfully.
The "stuff" doesn't go away.
And unfortunately, when we numb ourselves out, we can't do it selectively the source of inspiration and enthusiasm and personal energy also seems to get numbed.
Intelligent Dumbing Down There is another solution: intelligently dumbing down your brain by figuring out the next action.
But shifting your focus to something that your mind perceives as a doable, completeable task and tough a will create a real increase in positive energy, direction, problem may be, get rid of confusion and motivation.
If you truly captured all the things by taking one little that have your attention during the mind-sweep, go step toward through the list again now and decide on the single solution.
Do very next action to take on every one of them.
George You are either attracted or repelled by the things F. on your lists; there isn't any neutral territory.
Often it's simply the next-action decision that makes the difference between the two extremes.
In following up with people who have taken my seminars or been coached by my colleagues or me, Everything on your I've discovered that one of the subtler ways many of lists and in your them fall off the wagon is in letting their action lists stacks is either grow back into lists of tasks or subprojects instead of attractive or discrete next actions.
They're still ahead of most peo- repulsive to you there's no neutral ple because they're actually writing things down, but ground when it they often find themselves stuck, and procrastinatcomes to your stuff.
ing, because they've allowed their action lists to harbor items like: "Meeting with the banquet committee" "Johnny's birthday" "Receptionist" "Slide presentation" In other words, things have morphed back into "stuff-ness instead of staying at the action level.
There are no clear next actions here, and anyone keeping a list filled with items like this would send his or her brain into overload every time he/she looked at it.
you need to get your car tuned, for instance, you're Brock Chisolm going to have to figure out that next action at some point anyway.
The problem is that most people wait to do it until the next action is "Call the Auto Club for tow truck!!"
So when do you think most people really make a lot of their next-action decisions about their stuff-when it shows up, or when it blows up?
And do you think there might be a difference THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE in the quality of their lives if they handled this knowledge work on the front end instead of the back?
Which do you think is the more efficient way to move through lifedeciding Avoiding action next actions on your projects as soon as they appear decisions until the on your radar screen and then efficiently grouping pressure of the last them into categories of actions that you get done in minute creates huge certain uniform contexts, or avoiding thinking about inefficiencies and what exactly needs to be done until it has to be done, unnecessary stress.
One global corporate client surveyed its population about sources of stress in its culture, and the number one complaint was the last-minute crisis work consistently promoted by team leaders who failed to make appropriate decisions on the front end.
The Value of a Next-Action Decision-Making Standard I have had several sophisticated senior executives tell me that installing "What's the next action?"
Because the question forces clarity, accountability, productivity, and empowerment.
But without a clear conclusion that there is a next action, much less what it is CHAPTER 12 | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION or who's got it, more often than not a lot of "stuff" gets left up in the air.
I've learned the hard way that no matter where we are in the conversation, twenty minutes before the agreed end-time of the discussion I must force the question: "So what's the next action here?"
"Do we really know what we're doing here?"
What prevents those issues from slipping away into amorphous "stuff" is forcing the decision about the next action.
If you're not sure what I'm talking about, I suggest that in your next meeting with anyone, you end the conversation with the question, "So what's the next action here?"
Too many meetings end with a vague feeling among the players that something THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE ought to happen, and the hope that it's not their personal job to make it so.
Real "togetherness" of a group is reflected by the responsibility that all take for defining the real things to do and the specific people assigned to do them, so everyone is freed of the angst of still-undecided actions.
If you haven't, test it outtake a small risk and ask "So what's the next action on this?"
Productivity Organizations naturally become more productive when they model and train front-end next-action decision-making.
But in the world of knowledge F. work, all the computers and telecom improvements and leadership seminars on the planet will make no difference in this regard unless the individuals involved increase their operational responsiveness.
One of the biggest productivity leaks I have seen in some organizations is the lack of next actions determined for "longterm" projects.
CHAPTER 12 I THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION Those projects with distant goal lines are still to be Productivity will done as soon as possible; "long-term" simply means, improve only when "more action steps until it's done," not "no need to individuals increase decide next actions because the day of reckoning is so their operational far away."
organization is being monitored, it's a whole new ball And in knowledge work, that means game.
clarifying actions on the front end instead of the back.
People are constantly doing things, but usually only when they have to, under fire from themselves or others.
Getting things going of your own accord, before you're forced to by external pressure and internal stress, builds a firm foundation of self-worth that will spread into every aspect of your life.
Asking "What's the next action?"
The next time someone moans about something, try asking, "So what's the next action?"
People will complain only about something that THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES | PART THREE they assume could be better than it currently is.
people who get on Although my colleagues and I rarely promote in this world are our work in this way, I notice people really empowerthe people who get ing themselves every day as we coach them in applyup and look for the ing the next-action technique.
George Bernard tively managing the physical actions required to move things forward seems to exercise that power in Shaw ways that call forward the more positive aspects of our nature.
The Power of Outcome Focusing THE POWER OF directing our mental and imaginative processes to create change has been studied and promoted in thousands of contextsfrom the early "positive thinking" books to recent discoveries in advanced neurophysiology.
As you begin to use it habitually as your primary means of addressing all situationsfrom processing e-mails, to buying a house or a company, to structuring meetings or having conversations with your kidsyour personal productivity can go through the roof.
Many of the professionals I have worked with who integrated this method now find themselves experiencing enhanced or even new jobs and careers.
These processes really work in the arena of the ordinary things we must deal with dailythe stuff of THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES | PART THREE our work.
* It's been inspiring for me to learn and coach others how to deal with the immediate realities down where the rubber hits the roadand how to tie in the power of positive imagery to practical experiences in all our daily lives.
The "fast track" alluded to in the section heading above is a bit of misnomer.
The bottom line is it makes you more conscious, more focused, and more capable of implementing the changes and results you want, whatever they are.
"Create a way to regularly spend more time with my daughter" is as specific a project as any, and equally demanding of a next action to be determined.
Having the vague, gnawing sense that you "should" do something about your relationship with your daughter, and not actually doing anything, can be a killer.
I often work with clients who are willing to acknowledge the real things of their lives at this level as "incompletes"to write them down, define real projects about them, and ensure that next actions are decided onuntil the finish line is crossed.
That is real productivity, perhaps in its most awesome manifestation.
The Significance of Applied Outcome Thinking What I want to emphasize now is how learning to process the details of our work and lives with this clear and consistent system *Of course, the people who are most attracted to implementing Getting Things Done are usually already on a self-development track and don't assume that they'll be doing the same thing a year from now that they're doing now, anyway.
As I've said, employing next-action decision- Defining specific making results in clarity, productivity, accountability, projects and next and empowerment.
Exactly the same results happen actions that address when you hold yourself to the discipline of identify- real quality-oflife issues is ing the real results you want and, more specifically, productivity at the projects you need to define in order to produce its best.
As an expert in whole-brain learning and good friend of mine, Steven Snyder, put it, "There are only two problems in life: (1) you know what you want, and you don't know how to get it; and/or (2) you don't know what you want."
truth is, our energy as human beings seems to have a dualistic and teleological realitywe create and identify with things that aren't real yet on all the levels we experience; and when we do, we recognize how to restructure our current world to morph it into the new one, and experience an impetus to make it so.
("What's the successful THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE Life affords no outcome?")
Everything you experience as incomplete must have a reference point for "complete."
success to another, ("What's the next action?").
forming new Your life and work are made up of outcomes and wishes and seeing actions.
to organize everything that comes your way, at all Dr.
higher pleasure The Magic of Mastering the Mundane My clients often wonder how I can sit with them in their offices, often for hours on end, as they empty the drawers of their desks and painstakingly go through the minutiae of stuff that they have let accumulate in their minds and their physical space.
I know that we all need practice and support and a strong, clear focus to get through them, until we have the built-in standards and behaviors we need to engage with them as they demand.
CHAPTER 13 I THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING I'm in the focus business.
As a consultant and coach, Multilevel Outcome Management The marry high-level is to questions that often elicit very creative Ichallenge ask simple and intelligent responses from others (and even idealistic focus to myself!
What's unique about the practical focus of Getting Things Done is the combination of effectiveness and efficiency that these methods can bring to every level of your reality.
There are lots of inspirational sources for the high-level "purpose, values, vision" kind of thinking, and many more mundane tools for getting hold of smaller details such as phone numbers and appointments and grocery lists.
The value of all this natural project planning provides an integrated, flexible, aligned way through any situation.
Being comfortable with challenging the purpose of anything you may be doing is healthy and mature.
Being able to "make up" visions and images of success, before the methods are clear, is a phenomenal trait to strengthen.
Honing multiple ideas and types of information into components, sequences, and priorities aimed toward a specific outcome is a necessary mental discipline.
And deciding on and taking real next actionsactually moving on something in the physical worldare the essence of productivity.
Being able to bring all these ingredients together, with appropriate timing and balance, is perhaps the major component of professional competence for this new millennium.
But it's not yet the norm in professional behavior; far from it.
It's still a daunting task to apply this awareness to all the aspects of personal and professional life.
The feedback I have gotten over the years in my consulting, teaching, and coaching with this model has continued to validate that even the slightest increase in the use of natural planning can bring significant improvement.
To hear from executives who have used the model as a way to frame key meetings and discussions, and have gotten great value from doing that, is gratifying.
It all just affirms that the way our minds naturally work is the way that we should focus to make anything happen in the physical world.
The model is simply the basic principle of determining outcomes and actions for everything we consider to be our work.
When those two key focus points become the norm in our dayto-day lives, the baseline for productivity moves to another level.
The addition of brainstormingthe most creative means of expressing and capturing ideas, perspectives, and details about projectsmakes for an elegant set of behaviors for staying relaxed and getting things done.
CHAPTER 13 | THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING Shifting to a Positive Organizational Culture It doesn't take a big change to increase the productivity standards of a group.
"What do we want to accomplish with this software?"
There's plenty of talk in the Big Meetings that sounds good, but learning to ask "Why are we doing this?"
and "What will it look like when it's done successfully?"
Empowerment naturally ensues for individuals as they move from complaining and victim modalities into outcomes and actions defined for direction.
There are enough other problems to be concerned with; negativity and passive resistance need to continually give way to a focus on the desired results at the appropriate horizons.
The microcosm of how people deal with their in-baskets, e-mail, and conversations with others will be reflected in the macro-reality of their culture and organization.
If balls are dropped, if decisions about what to do are resisted on the front end, if not all the open loops are managed responsibly, that will be THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE A vision without a task is but a dream, a task without a vision is drudgery, a vision and a task is the hope of the world.
From a church in Sussex, England, ca.1730 magnified in the group, and the culture will sustain a stressful fire-and-crisis siege mentality.
The operational behaviors of this book, however, will provide the focus and framework for addressing them in the most productive way.
Conclusion I HOPE THIS book has been usefulthat you have started to reap the rewards of getting more done with less effort and stress.
I'll bet Getting Things Done has validated much of what you already know and have been doing to some degree all along.
My intent is not to add more to the plethora of modern theories and models about how to be successful.
Like gravity, when you understand the principle, you can operate a lot more effectively, no matter what you're doing.
Getting Things Done is a road map to achieve the positive, relaxed focus that characterizes your most productive state.
I invite you to use it, like a road map, as a reference tool to get back there whenever you need to.
To consistently stay on course, you'll have to do some things CONCLUSION that may not be habits yet: keep everything out of your head; decide actions and outcomes when things first emerge on your radar, instead of later; and regularly review and update the complete inventory of open loops of your life and work.
I hope by now you at least have established a reference point for the value these behaviors create.
Be patient, and enjoy the process.
Here are some final tips for moving forward:  Get your personal physical organization hardware set up.
Get your workstation organized.
Get in-baskets.
Create a personal filing systemfor work and home.
Get a good listmanagement organizer that you are inspired to play with.
Hang pictures, buy pens, toss stuff, rearrange your work space.
Gather everything into your system, and work through the Getting Things Done process.
(We're available.
Visit http://www.davidco.com anytime for tons of free support material, conversations about these best practices, current CONCLUSION information about supportive products and services, and access to our global network of people sharing the best practices in productivity.
