He was full of energy.
These call center jobs are low-wage, low-prestige jobs in America, but when shitted to India they become high-wage, high-prestige jobs.
Some did not know where India is.
I said it is the country next to Pakistan."
At the end of the day, these new jobs actually allow them to be more Indian.
I still continue with my Indian food and I still work for a multinational.
When you look around at 24/7's call center, you see that all the computers are running Microsoft Windows.
So even with the outsourcing of some service jobs from the United States to India, India's growing economy is creating a demand for many more American goods and services.
So now I wonder: If I have a granddaughter one day, and I tell her I'm going to India, will she say, "Grandpa, is that where software comes from?"
"I ran into him on an airplane recently," said Paul, "and he told me he had moved to India to head up GE's high-energy research there."
"Because of the time difference with India, they can work on it while you sleep and have it back in your morning."
"To China?
So all of these Japanese companies are coming in."
First we will have our young people employed by the foreigners, and then we will start our own companies.
I worked for the state government and I retired, and [after a little while] I thought I have to do something else and I just love it."
And the new, new thing, I was also learning, is the degree to which it is now possible for companies and individuals to source work anywhere.
In fact, there was no better system in the world for that than communism.
"That was what the world was like for many people on the planet before the fall of the wall.
It also paved the way for the THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD adoption of common standardsstandards on how economies should be run, on how accounting should be done, on how banking should be conducted, on how PCs should be made, and on how economics papers should be written.
Yes, there were emerging e-mail systems and networks to communicate with on the THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Internet, but sharing data was really rudimentarybecause there were no Web sites or Web pages or Web browsers to bring to life the data in other people's computers, and worse, no easy way to navigate to them.
That's what the Internet does.
And what is the World Wide Web?
It explained how the World Wide Web worked, how one could own a browser, how to go about setting up a Web server.
But the World Wide Web is Berners-Lee's alone.
Netscape went public on August 9, 1995, and the world has not been the same since.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Netscape was a huge flattening force for several reasons.
They wanted companies to compete with each other over different applications, that is, over what consumers could do once they were on the Internetnot over how they got on the Internet in the first place.
[But] people did it very quickly, and ten years later there were eight hundred million people on the Internet."
We called up Morgan Stanley, and they said, 'We're thinking of bringing it out at $31/1 said, 'No, let's keep it at $28,' because I wanted people to remember it as a $20 stock, not a $30 stock, just in case it didn't go so well.
"Netscape was not a dot-com.
Here's how the work flow revolution de veloped: When the walls went down, and then the PC and Netscape browser enabled people to connect with other people as never before, it did not take long before all these people who were connecting wanted to do more than just browse and send e-mail, instant messages, pictures, and music over this Internet platform.
But more often than not, back in the 1980s and early 1990s, companies did not run all the same software and hardware.
But for your company to get really flat, e-mail was not enough.
And TCP/IP (transmission control protocol/ Internet protocol) was the railroad trackthe transport system that took the data from your Web pages around the Internet from computer to computer and Web site to Web site.
In the Business Web, as it is being called, you access these tools on the Web, use them on the Web, and store all your business data on the Web, rather than on your own computers.
There is no question that the Business Web will challenge Microsoft.
Also, as Microsoft has demonstrated, it too will make some of its programs available on the Business Web.
And we were playing this very big-stakes game for e-commerce.
And he says to me, 'It's built on top of Apache.'
These were huge companies.
It's called Wikipedia.
Here was this program that you just downloaded for free, and they even gave you the source code with it, and it was done by a community of people.
(A Web server is a software program that enables anyone to use his or her home or office computer to host a Web site on the World Wide Web.
Amazon.com, for instance, has long run its Web site on Apache software.
So THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD IBM eventually decided that if it could not beat Apache, it should join Apache.
"IBM said, 'We would like to figure out how we can use [Apache] and not get flamed by the Internet com munity, [how we can] make it sustainable and not just be ripping people off but contributing to the process...' IBM was saying that this new model for software development was trustworthy and valuable, so let's in vest in it and get rid of the one that we are trying to make on our own, which isn't as good."
Our engineers came to us and said, These guys who do Apache are good and they are insisting that we contribute good people.'
The community of programmers was small and close-knit.
Community-based software development is now a business, one that holds potential for Microsoft as for every other company.
There is a big advantage to students and companies that you can go any where in the world today, fire up a computer, and find a standardized Microsoft Word program to write your business report or essay on.
So they started to work ith Indian [technology] companies who they might not have worked ith otherwise."
Now they needed those Indian engineers not just HE WORLD IS FLAT ecause there were a lot of them, but precisely because they were low-cost.
Companies found that they could go to IT and find four incredibly smart Chinese engineers who were ready o go back to China and work for them from there for the same amount hat it would cost them to hire one engineer in America.
Offshoring, which has been around for decades, is different rom outsourcing.
Some foreign companies set up shop in China o do just that.
"Before, you had he thought in the back of your mind that there could be a turning back o state communism.
China has ore than 160 cities with a population of one million or more.
Instead of competing with hina as an enemy, argues Ohmae, you break down your business and hink about which part of the business you would like to do in China, hich part you would like to sell to China, and which part you want to uy from China.
This is known n the business as "the China price."
"We could not have done what we have done in China in 1983 r 1993," said Perkowski.
Now you can stay home and do it with the Internet.
"If you are sitting in he U.S. and don't figure out how to get into China," he said, "in ten or ifteen years from now you will not be a global leader."
Three United States are better han one, and five would be better than three.
Thanks HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD o the efficiency of its supply chain alone, Wal-Mart's cost of goods is es imated to be 5 to 10 percent less than that of most of its competitors.
al-Mart is the China of companies.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD he best way to get a taste of Wal-Mart's power as a global flattener is o visit Japan.
(now "The UPS Store" in the United States) so hat it could offer individuals and small businesses the power of its global upply-chain services.
HE WORLD IS FLAT  l A T T I M R  I ) N-FORMING oogle, Yahoo!, MSN Web Search y friend and I met a guy at a restaurant.
We do discriminate only to the degree that if you can't use a com uter or don't have access to one, you can't use Google, but other than hat, if you can type, you can use Google," said Google C E O Eric chmidt.
And you may be shocked to discover all the things that eople, or companies, can find out about you from your salary to here you live to your favorite books just by Googling you.
If you can get on Google, you have access to the orld's greatest research tool, without having to go to MIT.
These steroids should ake uploading that much more open, because they will enable more ndividuals to collaborate with one another in more ways and from more laces than ever before.
It means that they can move very fast to adopt new, state-ofthe-art technologies, which is why there are already more cell phones in se in China today than there are people in the United States.
One day after class, one of my students came up to me and told me his story: He and his Harvard colleagues had formed a student organiza ion with students in China.
And the zippies don't ust have a pent-up demand for good jobs; they want the good life.
But Google is the key.
If [Indians] think that they've got something going nd there is something they can keep that's not going to go anywhere, HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E hat will be a big mistake, because we have got Eastern Europe, which is aking up, and we have got China, which is waiting to get on the ser ices bandwagon to do various things.
"I think in the case of the United States hat is what happened a bit.
And if you are able to emonstrate your work, using the same infrastructure, and if people are omfortable giving work to you, and if you are diligent and clean in your ransactions, then you are in business."
Between 2000 and 2004, total global Internet usage grew 125 ercent, including 186 percent in Africa, 209 percent in Latin America, 24 percent in Europe, and 105 percent in North America, according to ielsen/NetRatings.
In 995, just 2% of home buyers used the Internet to look for a home.
Were the Indian engineers not being "exploited" when their overnment educated them in some of the best technical institutes in the orld inside India, but then that same Indian government pursued a so ialist economic policy that could not provide those engineers with work n India, so that those who could not get out of India had to drive taxis to at?
But they do want sustainable companies.
The AP reported that Yahoo!
"Everything is by e-mail now," he said.
And they just keep coming, wave after ave. How in the world can it possibly be good for my daughters and mil ions of other young Americans that these Indians can do the same jobs s they can for a fraction of the wages?"
But if you look at the prize they are go ng after, it is now a much expanded and more complex market.
If that weren't happening, Intel ould be out of business today.
But as long as the pie eeps growing and getting more complex, and as long as the individuals n your country keep adding to that pie by imagining new services and roducts in which to specialize, and as long as those individuals keep ducating themselves and developing the skills needed to master these  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ew jobs, workers in India, China, Europe, and America can all do ell at the same time.
And the more they do that, the higher they limb, the more room is created at the top because the more they ave, the more they spend, the more diverse product markets become, nd the more niches for specialization are created as well.
Because the companies that are adjusting best to the flat world are  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ot just making minor changes, they are changing the whole model of the ork they do and how they do itin order to take advantage of the flatworld platform and to compete with others who are doing the same.
And a lot f the middle class are where that [old] middle is .
lthough good people skills were always an asset in the working orld, they will be even more so in a flat world, because many more roducts will be made in global supply chains, many new middle jobs ill involve making supply chains more efficient.
This came to be known as business process outsourcing, and it as spread from Texas to Bangalore, thanks to the flattening of the world.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T ATH OVERS ne by-product of the fact that the PC enables all of us to become au hors of our own content in digital formwhether it is words, spread heets, data, photos, blogs, music, or videois that more and more of hat we design, what we write, what we buy, what we sell, and what we nvent is built on a foundation of math.
and Google.'
You ould work on hardware, you could program system software, or you ould work on application algorithms.
You [Americans] have all the things you need to get your people from he old middle to the new middle," said Nandan Nilekani of Infosys.
Without trust there is no isk-taking and without risk-taking there is no innovation .
is still the leading engine for innovation in the world.
s the NSB study noted, "Since the 1980s other countries have in reased investment in S&E education and the S&E workforce at higher ates than the United States has.
nly 7 percent in the United States did."
There is a saying n China that whatever you put in your head and your stomach, no one an take away from you.
From 1980 to 2003, Japan's share of orld industrial patents rose from 12 percent to 21 percent, and Taiwan's rom 0 percent to 3 percent.
Japan!
How far is China behind?'
When you are Mexico and your claim o fame is that you are a low-wage manufacturing country, and some of our people are importing statuettes of your own patron saint from  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hina, because China can make them and ship them all the way across he Pacific more cheaply than you can produce them, you are living in a lat world.
And it was about China."
There is no way they can ever compete with things made in China.'"
And change Ireland did.
We set up in Ireland in 1990," Michael Dell, founder of Dell omputer, explained to me in an e-mail.
"India is another example.
When I saw him a few months later, he told me about he moment when he realized why India's economy as a whole still had ot taken off as much as it should haveoutside of the high-tech sector.
I think the real issue is leadership.
China does not just want to et rich.
(Some of the program ing was being done in-house at Aramex and some was outsourced.
"I could go right to the Internet and use the latest technologies," e said.
These companies create a plat orm that allows individual customers to serve themselves in their own ay, at their own pace, in their own time, according to their own tastes.
Then the world was flattened and the Internet came along.
Which is why in the flat world, more nd more companies are now being born global.
The best companies re finding ways to leverage the best of what is in India with the best f what is in North Dakota with the best of what is in Los Angeles.
The fact that so many people worldwide now ave the tools to create and upload their own contenttheir own news re orts, their own opinions, their own music, their own videos, their own pho os, their own software, their own encyclopedias, their own dictionaries s a very powerful force for the preservation and enhancement of cultural utonomy and particularity.
But before the world got flat, ndia had virtually no companies doing this business at all.
It is about the global market, but it s also about the Internet and Google.
They now instant-message each other each ight to collaborate on the delivery of services to people and companies  H E W O R L D IS F L A T round the world.
When so many eople can upload and globalize their voice, their video, their blog, their  H A T H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
And if ou want to find out what people are saying, all you have to do is type our name into Google or Technorati.com and hit Search.
I confess, there was a time hen I would use Google to see what was being written about this book.
Because when we are all publishers with ur own blogs, and when we are all broadcasters through YouTube, and  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hen we are all paparazzi thanks to our cell phone cameras, we are all ublic figures.
I don't want to read about this in your MySpace!"?
You can be in the middle class in your head whether you make 2 a day or $200, if you believe in social mobilitythat your kids have a hance to live better than you doand that hard work and playing by the ules of your society will get you where you want to go.
here is no question that China and India are better off for having at east part of their population in the flat world.
I like to call them Islamo-Leninists.
There  H E W O R L D IS F L A T re just eighteen computers per one thousand people in the Arab region oday, compared with the global average of seventy-eight per one thou and, and only 1.6 percent of the Arab population has Internet access.
Then came the neo-Muslims.
China is a high-pride country.
In 2020, here will be 1.5 billion people in China.
All we need is some leadership.
The keyboard came from either a Japanese-owned ompany in Tianjin, China (Alps), a Taiwanese-owned factory in Shen- HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T P R E V E N T I O N hen, China (Sunrex), or a Taiwanese-owned factory in Suzhou, China Darfon).
India is to the world's knowledge and service supply chain hat China and Taiwan are to the manufacturing ones.
If we are not going o shut down the Internet and all the other creative and collaborative ools that have flattened the world, and if we can't restrict access to them, he only thing we can do is try to influence the imagination and inten ions that people bring to them and draw from them.
His administration transformed the United  H E W O R L D IS F L A T tates into "the United States of Fighting Terrorism."
It is India.
