The good-to-great examples that made the final cut into the study attained extraordinary results, averaging cumulative stock returns 6.9 times the general market in the fifteen years following their transition points.2 To put that in perspective, General Electric (considered by many to be the best-led company in America at the end of the twentieth century) outperformed the market by 2.8 times over the fifteen years 1985 to 2000.3 Furthermore, if you invested $1 in a mutual fund of the good-togreat companies in 1965, holding each company at the general market rate until the date of transition, and simultaneously invested $1 in a general market stock fund, your $1 in the good-to-great fund taken out on January 1, 2000, would have multiplied 471 times, compared to a 56 fold increase in the market.4 These are remarkable numbers, made all the more remarkable when you consider the fact that they came from companies that had previously been so utterly unremarkable.
Consider just one case, Walgreens.
From December 31, 1975, to January 1, 2000, $1 invested in Walgreens beat $1 invested in technology superstar Intel by nearly two times, General Electric by nearly five times, Coca-Cola by nearly eight times, and the general stock market (including the NASDAQ stock run-up at the end of 1999) by over fifteen times.
Who would have thought that Fannie Mae would beat companies like GE and Coca-Cola?
All companies have a culture, some companies have discipline, but few companies have a culture of discipline.
When you have disciplined people, you don't need hierarchy.
When you have disciplined thought, you don't need bureaucracy.
T H E T I M E L E S S " P H Y S I C S " O F G O O D TO GREAT I had just finished presenting my research to a set of Internet executives gathered at a conference, when a hand shot up.
We were not looking for Level 5 leadership or anything like it.
All the good-to-great companies had Level 5 leadership at the time of transition.
Consider the case of Colman Mockler, C E O of Gillette from 1975 to 1991.
$1 invested in Gillette.
But no matter, if Walgreens had to fly in the face of long-standing family tradition in order to focus its resources where it could be the best in Good to Great the world (convenient drugstores), Cork would do it.
Consider the case of Wells Fargo.
At a time when its sector of the banking industry fell 59 percent behind the general stock market, Wells Fargo outperformed the market by over three times.4 Carl Reichardt, who became C E O in 1983, attributed the bank's success largely to the people around him, most of whom he inherited from Cooley.5As he listed members of the Wells Fargo executive team that had joined the company during the Cooley-Reichardt era, we were stunned.
Nearly every person had gone on to become C E O of a major company: Good to Great Bill Aldinger became the C E O of Household Finance, Jack Grundhofer became C E O of U.S. Bancorp, Frank Newman became C E O of Bankers Trust, Richard Rosenberg became C E O of Bank of America, Bob Joss became C E O of Westpac Banking (one of the largest banks in Australia) and later became dean of the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University-not exactly your garden variety executive team!
From right across the street at Wells Fargo.
From 1973 to 1998, while Jim Collins Wells Fargo went from buildup to breakthrough results, Bank of America's cumulative stock returns didn't even keep pace with the general market.
WELLS FARCO VERSUS BANK OF AMERICA Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, January 1, 1973 -January1, 1998 $80 Wells Fargo: $74.47 $40 Wells Fargo Point $20 Now, you might be thinking, "That's just good management- the idea of getting the right people around you.
"12 Maxwell made it absolutely clear that there would only be seats for A players who were going to put forth an A+ effort, and if you weren't up for it, you had better get off the bus, and get off now.13 O n e executive who had just uprooted his life and career to join Fannie Mae came to Maxwell and said, "I listened to you very carefully, and I don't want to do this."
If you're a genius, you don't need a Wells Fargo-caliber management team of people who could run their own shows elsewhere.
Good to Great I T ' S W H O Y O U PAY, N O T H O W Y O U PAY T H E M We expected to find that changes in incentive systems, especially executive incentives, would be highly correlated with making the leap from good to great.
Most importantly, when we analyzed executive compensation patterns relative to comparison companies, we found no systematic differences on the use of stock (or not), high salaries (or not), bonus incentives (or not), or long-term compensation (or not).
If you have the right executives on the bus, they will do everything within their power to build a great company, not because of what they will "get" for it, but because they simply cannot imagine settling for anything less.
We look at it the same way at Pitney Bowes.
First, Wells Fargo did fewer big layoffs than its comparison .~~ upper management, including company, Bank of A r n e r i ~ a Second, some senior Wells Fargo upper management, suffered more on a percentage basis than lower-level workers in the c o n ~ o l i d a t i o nRigor .
Even in the Wells Fargo case, the company used layoffs half as much as Bank of America during the transition era.
But not Circuit City.
"46 Five years into Wurtzel's tenure, Circuit City and Silo had essentially the same business strategy (the same answers to the "what" questions), yet Circuit City took off like a rocket, beating the general stock market 18.5 to 1 in the fifteen years after its transition, while Silo Jim Collins bumped along until it was finally acquired by a foreign company.47Same strategy, different people, different results.
We noticed a Level 5 atmosphere at the top executive level of every good-to-great company, especially during the key transition years.
"No ~ ~matter how much they argued, said a Philip Morris executive, "they were always in search of the best answer.
During the course of our conversations, I asked them if they thought Colman Mockler, the C E O most responsible for Gillette's transition from good to great, had a great life.
After that, the two companies completely diverged, and over the next twenty-five years, Kroger generated cumulative returns ten times the market and eighty times better than A&P.
When we asked the executives about their management team meetings during the transition era, they said that they spent much of the time "just trying to understand."
Bethlehem Steel executives had known for years about the threat of mini-mill companies like Nucor.
Most people viewed Fannie Mae as totally beholden to shifts in the direction of interest rates-they go up and Fannie Mae loses, they go down and Fannie Mae wins-and many believed that Fannie Mae could succeed only if the government stepped in to clamp down on interest rates.54"That's their only hope," said one analyst.55 But that's not the way David Maxwell and his newly assembled team viewed the situation.
You must never confuse faith that you will prevail in the end- which you can never afford to lose-with the discipline to confront the most brutal facts of your current reality, whatever they might be."
Good to Great To have a fully developed Hedgehog Concept, you need all three circles.
The Wells Fargo focus on its Hedgehog Concept was so intense that it became, in its executives' own words, "a mantra."
But then, in 1974, Abbott had a breakthrough in performance, producing cumulative returns of 4.0 times the market and 5.5 times Upjohn over the next fifteen years.
One crucial difference @tween the two companies is that Abbott developed a Hedgehog Concept based on what it could be the best at and Upjohn did not.
Abbott eventually became the number one company in both of these arenas, which moved it far down the path of becoming the best company in the world at creating products that make health care more cost-effective.18 Upjohn never confronted the same brutal reality and continued to live with the delusion that it could beat Merck.19 Later, when it fell even further behind the pharmaceutical leaders, it diversified into arenas where it definitely could not be the best in the world, such as plastics and chemicals.
Kimberly-Clark: Could become the best in the world at paper-based consumer products.
Notes: Early in transition, Philip Morris saw that it could become simply the best tobacco company in the world.
Or consider Wells Fargo.
A board member told me during my research for a previous project, "I really love being on Good to Great 10s the board of Philip Morris.
Yet, unlike Philip Morris, R. J. Reynolds executives began to diversify away from tobacco into any arena where it could get growth, regardless of whether they had passion for those acquisitions or whether the company could be the best in the world at them.
But throughout the good-togreat companies, passion became a key part of the Hedgehog Concept.
Consider the case of Great Western and Fannie Mae.
T h e Hedgehog Concept is a turning point in the journey from good to great.
FANNIE MAE, GREAT WESTERN, AND THE GENERAL MARKET Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, 1984 - 2000 Fannie Mae: $64.17 General Market $11 53 / Notes: 1.
When asked, "How do we accelerate the process of getting a Hedgehog Concept?"
Infused with the Stockdale Paradox ("There must be something we can become the best at, and we will find it!
Few successful start-ups become great companies, in large part because Good to Great I I I they respond to growth and success in the wrong way.
In a sense, much of this book is about creating a culture of discipline.
Indeed, discipline by itself will not produce great results.
Consider Wells Fargo in contrast to Bank of America.
O n the one hand, the good-to-great companies became more disciplined than the direct comparison companies, as with Wells Fargo in contrast to Bank of America.
Yes, discipline is essential for great results, but disciplined action without disciplined understanding of the three circles cannot produce sustained great results.
Few companies have the discipline to discover their Hedgehog Concept, much less the discipline to build consistently within it.
If you don't like it-if you really feel you need that class distinction-well, then, Nucor is just not the right place for you.59 In contrast to Nucor's dental suite-sized headquarters, Bethlehem Steel built a twenty-one-story office complex to house its executive staff.
By the 1990s, Nucor's profitability beat Bethlehem's every single year, and at the end of the century, Nucor-which Good to Great had been less than a third the size of Bethlehem only a decade earlierfinally surpassed Bethlehem in total revenues.62Even more astounding, Nucor's average five-year profit per employee exceeded Bethlehem by almost ten times.63And for the investor, $1 invested in Nucor beat $1 invested in Bethlehem Steel by over 200 times.
When Darwin Smith became C E O of Kimberly-Clark, he made great use of "stop doing" lists.
If you have Level 5 leaders who get the right people on the bus, if you confront the brutal facts of reality, if you create a climate where the truth is heard, if you have a Council and work within the three circles, if you frame all decisions in the context of a crystalline Hedgehog Concept, if you act from understanding, not bravado-if you do all these things, then you are likely to be right on the big decisions.
Throughout, Walgreens executives embraced the Stockdale Paradox: "We have complete faith that we can prevail in an Internet world as a great company; yet, we must also confront the brutal facts of reality about the Internet."
Gillette also became a pioneer in the application of technology.
For example, to create the Sensor, Gillette invested over $200 million in design and development, most of it focused on manufacturing breakthroughs, and earned twenty-nine patents.13It pioneered the application of laser welding on a mass scale to shaving systems-a technology normally used for expensive and sophisticated products like heart pacemakers.14 The whole key to Gillette's shaving systems lay in manufacturing technology so unique and proprietary that Gillette protected it the way Coca-Cola protects its secret formula, complete with armed guards and security clearances.ls ]im Collins I T E C H N O L O G Y A C C E L E R A T O R S IN T H E 0- GREAT C Technology Accelerators Linked to Hedgehog Concept during Transition Era Abbott Pioneered application of computer technology to increase economic denominator of profit per employee.
Philip Morris Pioneered application of both packaging and manufacturing technology.
Does the technology fit directly with your Hedgehog Concept?
In the comparison companies, by contrast, we found only three cases of pioneering in the application of technology.
Technology without a clear Hedgehog Concept, and without the discipline to stay within the three circles, cannot make a company great.
But when we asked Ken Iverson, C E O of Nucor during its transition, to name the top five factors in the shift from good to great, where on the list lim Collins do you think he put technology?
No technology can make you Level 5.
No technology can create a culture of discipline.
rim Collins For example, on August 27, 1984, Forbes magazine published an article on Circuit City.
In case after case, we found fewer articles in the decade leading up to the point of transition than in the decade after, by an average factor of nearly three times.4 Good to Great CIRCUIT CITY Cumulat~veValue of $1 Invested, Number of Art~clesFound December 31, 1972 - December 31, 1992 C~rcu~t city $31 I 64 $300 $200 $1 00 General Market $8 35 For example, Ken Iverson and Sam Siege1 began turning the Nucor flywheel in 1965.
If you had asked executives at Bethlehem Steel or U.S. Steel about "The Nucor Threat" in 1970, they would have laughed, if they even recognized the company name at all (which is doubtful).
By 1975, the year of its transition point on the stock chart, Nucor had already built its third mini-mill, long established its unique culture of productivity, and was well on its way to .
"15 Good to Great Nucor "We did not make a decision that this was what we stood for at any specific moment.
At Circuit City, the buildup stage lasted nine years, at Nucor ten years, whereas at Gillette it took only five years, at Fannie Mae only three years, and at Pitney Bowes about two years.
"How do we get people to embrace change?"
Then, around 1975, it dawned on the Nucor people that if they just kept pushing on the flywheel, they could become the number one, most profitable steel company in America.
To understand the role of acquisitions in the process of going from good to great, we undertook a systematic qualitative and quantitative analysis of all acquisitions and divestitures in all the companies in our study, from ten years before the transition date through 1998.
Good to Great H O W TO T E L L IF Y O U ' R E O N T H E Signs That You're on the Flywheel (Good-to-Great Companies) Signs That You're in the Doom Loop (Comparison Companies) Follow a pattern of buildup leading to breakthrough.
Jump right to action, without disciplined thought and without first getting the right people on the bus.
Next, when you attain deep understanding about the three circles of your Hedgehog Concept and begin to push in a direction consistent with that understanding, you hit breakthrough momentum and accelerate with key accelerators, chief among them pioneering the application of technology tied directly back to your three circles.
And like most overnight successes, it was about twenty years in the making.3 If there ever was a classic case of buildup leading to a Hedgehog Concept, followed by breakthrough momentum in the flywheel, Wal-Mart is it.
The only difference is that Sam Walton followed the model as an entrepreneur building a great company from the ground up, rather than as a C E O transforming an established company from good to great.
First, at the top levels of your organization, you absolutely must have the discipline not to hire until you find the right people.
The sifting process had four layers of analysis: I; I CRSP dat; 'cted Into Industrv Cut 1: From t h e Universe of C o m p a n i e s t o 1,435 Companies We elected to begin our search with a list of companies that appeared on the Fortune rankings of America's largest public companies, going as far back as 1965, when the list came into existence.
C u t 2: F r o m 1 , 4 3 5 C o m p a n i e s t o 1 2 6 C o m p a n i e s Our next step was to use data from the University of Chicago Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) to make our final selection of good-togreat companies.
C u t 3: F r o m 1 2 6 C o m p a n i e s t o 1 9 C o m p a n i e s Drawing upon the research database at the University of Chicago Center for Research in Securities Pricing (CRSP), we analyzed the cumulative stock returns of each candidate company relative to the general market, looking for the good-to-great stock return pattern.
(Note: At the time of initial selection into the study, three of the companies did not yet have a full fifteen years of cumulative stock data-Circuit City, Fannie Mae, and Wells Fargo.
p $ " %< 5; " " j 1; UNSUSTAINEU COMPARISONS Unsustained Comparison Number of Years of Rise* Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to Market during the Years of Rise Burroughs 10.08 13.76 0.21 Chrysler 5.67 10.54 0.69 Harris 6.42 6.63 0.16 Hasbro 6.33 35.00 0.63 10.83 6.97 0.31: Teledyne 9.42 17.95 0.22 Median 7.92 12.15 0.26 Unsustained Average 8.12 5 15.14 0.37 Rubbermaid Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to Market during the Next Ten Years t Good-to-Great Average over t h e analogous period * This is the number of years from the moment of upward transition to the peak of the rise, when the unsustained comparison begins to decline again relative to the market.
All major articles published on the company over its entire history, from broadburces such as Forbes, Fortune, Business Week, the Wall Street fournal, Nation's Business, the New York Times, U.S. News, the New Republic, Harvard Business Review, and the Economist and from selected articles from industry- or topic-specific sources.
Executive Compensation This unit examined executive compensation across the companies in our study.
I N D U S T R Y P E R F O R M A N C E F R O M T R A N S I T I O N Y E A R TO 1 9 9 5 , C O R R E S P O N O I N G TO E A C H C O M P A N Y - Company Years of Calculation Number of Industries Ranked Industry That Rest Reflects Company Rank of That Industry Abbott 1974-1995 Medical products 40% Circuit City 1982-1995 Retail specialty 21% Fannie Mae 1984-1995 S&L* 77% Gillette 1980-1995 Cosmetics 25% Kimberly-Clark 1972-1995 Household products 28% Kroger 1973-1995 Retail food chain 19% Nucor 1975-1995 Steel 99% Percentile of Industry Appendix 5.A Company Years of Calculation Number of Industries Ranked Industry That Best Reflects Company Rank of That Industry Philip Morris 1972-1995' Tobacco 4% Pitney Bowes 1974-1995 Computer systems 97% Walgreens 1975-1995 Retail drugstore 18% Wells Fargo 1983-1995 Major regional banks 76% Percentile of Industry 'The savings and loan industry was deemed the best proxy for Fannie Mae.
But h e did not instill this concept into his executive team.
When the C E O retired, it became clear that he was the primary force in the flywheel, not a strong team guided by a systematic Hedgehog Concept.
The cases where a charismatic C E O eventually became a liability for the company were Great Western, Warner-Lambert, Scott Paper, Bethlehem Steel, R. J. Reynolds, Addressograph-Multigraph, Eckerd, Bank of America, Burroughs, Chrysler, Rubbermaid, and Teledyne.
