The good-to-great examples that made the final cut into the study attained extraordinary results, averaging cumulative stock returns 6.9 times the general market in the fifteen years following their transition points.2 To put that in perspective, General Electric (considered by many to be the best-led company in America at the end of the twentieth century) outperformed the market by 2.8 times over the fifteen years 1985 to 2000.3 Furthermore, if you invested $1 in a mutual fund of the good-togreat companies in 1965, holding each company at the general market rate until the date of transition, and simultaneously invested $1 in a general market stock fund, your $1 in the good-to-great fund taken out on January 1, 2000, would have multiplied 471 times, compared to a 56 fold increase in the market.4 These are remarkable numbers, made all the more remarkable when you consider the fact that they came from companies that had previously been so utterly unremarkable.
Consider just one case, Walgreens.
For over forty years, Walgreens had bumped along as a very average company, more or less tracking the general market.
Then in 1975, seemingly out of nowhere-bang!-Walgreens began to clinib .
From December 31, 1975, to January 1, 2000, $1 invested in Walgreens beat $1 invested in technology superstar Intel by nearly two times, General Electric by nearly five times, Coca-Cola by nearly eight times, and the general stock market (including the NASDAQ stock run-up at the end of 1999) by over fifteen times.
And why was Walgreens able to make the leap when other companies in the same industry with the same opportunities and similar resources, such as Eckerd, did not make the leap?
This book is not about Walgreens per se, or any of the specific compa*Calculations of stock returns used throughout this book reflect the total cumulative return to an investor, dividends reinvested and adjusted for stock splits.
T h e "general stock market" (often referred to as simply "the market") reflects the totality of stocks traded on the New York Exchange, American Stock Exchange, and NASDAQ.
In chapter 2, we launch headlong into the findings themselves, beginning with one of the most provocative of the whole study: Level 5 leadership.
We picked fifteen years because it would transcend one-hit wonders and lucky breaks (you can't just be lucky for fifteen years) and would exceed the average tenure of most chief executive officers (helping us to separate great companies from companies that just happened to have a single great leader).
For perspective, a mutual fund of the following "marquis set" of companies beat the market by only 2.5 times over the years 1985 to 2000: 3M, Boeing, Coca-Cola, GE, Hewlett-Packard, Intel, Johnson & Johnson, Merck, Motorola, Pepsi, Procter & Gamble, Wal-Mart, and Walt Disney.
From an initial universe of companies that appeared on the Fortune 500 in the years 1965 to 1995, we systematically searched and sifted, eventually finding eleven good-to-great examples.
Who would have thought that Fannie Mae would beat companies like GE and Coca-Cola?
O r that Walgreens could beat Intel?
We systematically coded all the material into categories, such as strategy, technology, leadership, and so forth.
Then we interviewed most of the good-to-great executives who held key positions of responsibility during the transition era.
We also initiated a wide range of qualitative and quantitative analyses, looking at everything from acquisitions to executive compensation, from business strategy to corporate culture, from layoffs to leadership style, from financial ratios to management turnover.
For example: Larger-than-life, celebrity leaders who ride in from the outside are negatively correlated with taking a company from good to great.
We found no systematic pattern linking specific forms of executive compensation to the process of going from good to great.
The idea that the structure of executive compensation is a key driver in corporate performance is simply not supported by the data.
Technology and technology-driven change has virtually nothing to do with igniting a transformation from good to great.
Technology_can accelerate a transformation, but technology cannot cause a transformation.
- -Mergers and acquisitions play virtually no role in igniting a transformation from good to great; two big mediocrities joined together never make one great company.
The good-to-great companies paid scant attention to managing change, motivating people, or creating alignment.
Under the right conditions, the problems of commitment, alignment, motivation, and change largely melt away.
Every primary concept in the final framework showed up as a change variable in 100 percent of the good-to-great companies and in less than 30 percent of the comparison companies during the pivotal years.
Think of the transformation as a process of buildup followed by breakthrough, broken into three broad stages: d m k e d people, disciplined thought, and disciplined action.
We were surprised, shocked really, to discover the type of leadership required for turning a good company into a great one.
Self-effacing, quiet, reserved, even shy-these leaders are a Good to Great paradoxical blend of personal humility and professional will.
Every good-to-great company embraced what we came to call the Stockdale Paradox: You must maintain unwavering faith that you can and will prevail in the end, regardless of the difficulties, AND a t the same time have the discipline to confront the most brutal facts of your current reality, whatever they might be.
The Hedgehog Concept (Simplicity within the Three Circles).
All companies have a culture, some companies have discipline, but few companies have a culture of discipline.
When you have disciplined people, you don't need hierarchy.
When you have disciplined thought, you don't need bureaucracy.
When you have disciplined action, you don't need excessive controls.
When you combine a culture of discipline with an ethic of entrepreneurship, you get the magical alchemy of great performance.
Good-to-great companies think differently about the role of technology.
They never use technology as the primary means of igniting a transformation.
We learned that , jim Collins technology by itself is never a primary, root cause of either greatness or decline.
The Flywheel a n d the Doom Loop.
Those who launch revolutions, dramatic change programs, and wrenching restructurings will almost certainly fail to make the leap from good to great.
T H E T I M E L E S S " P H Y S I C S " O F G O O D TO GREAT I had just finished presenting my research to a set of Internet executives gathered at a conference, when a hand shot up.
"Will your findings continue to apply in the new economy?
It's a legitimate question, as we do live in a time of dramatic change, and it comes up so often that I'd like to dispense with it right up front, before heading into the meat of the book.
Think of it this way: While the practices of engineering continually evolve and change, the laws of physics remain relatively fixed.
I like to think of our work as a search for timeless principles-the enduring physics of great organizations-that will remain true and relevant no matter how the world changes around us.
Yes, the specific application will change (the engineering), but certain immutable laws of organized human performance (the physics) will endure.
The truth is, there's nothing new about being in a new economy.
Those who faced the invention of electricity, the telephone, the automobile, the radio, or the transistor-did they feel it was any less of a new economy than we feel today?
And in each rendition of the new economy, the best leaders have adhered to certain basic principles, with rigor and discipline.
Some people will point out that the scale and pace of change is greater today than anytime in the past.
Even so, some of the companies in our good-to-great study faced rates of change that rival anything in the new economy.
For example, during the early 1980s, the banking industry was completely transformed in about three years, as the full weight of deregulation came crashing down.
It was certainly a new economy for the banking industry!
Yet Wells Fargo applied every single finding in this book to produce great results, right smack in the middle of the fast-paced change triggered by deregulation.
1971, a seemingly ordinary man named Darwin E. Smith became chief executive of Kimberly-Clark, a stodgy old paper company whose stock had fallen 36 percent behind the general market over the previous twenty years.
In that period, Smith created a stunning transformation, turning Kimberly-Clark into the leading paper-based consumer products company in the world.
Under his stewardship, Kimberly-Clark generated cumulative stock returns 4.1 times the general market, handily beating its direct rivals Scott Paper and Procter & Gamble is Jim Collins and outperforming such venerable companies as Coca-Cola, HewlettPackard, 3M, and General Electric.
A man who carried no airs of self-importance, Smith found his favorite companionship among plumbers and electricians and spent his vacations rumbling around his Wisconsin farm in the cab of a backhoe, digging holes and moving rocks.3 He never cultivated hero status or executive celebrity tatu us.^ When a journalist asked him to describe his management style, Smith, dressed unfashionably like a farm boy wearing his first suit bought at J.
Smith grew up as a poor Indiana farm-town boy, putting himself through college by working the day shift at International Harvester and attending Indiana University at night.
Its economics were bad and the competition weak.9 But, they reasoned, if Kimberly-Clark thrust itself into the - Good to Great is BEFORE DARWIN SMITH Kimberly-Clark, Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, 1951 - 1971 General Market: 58.30 DARWIN SMITH TENURE Kimberly-Clark, Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, 1971 - 1991 Kimberly-Clark: $39.87 General Market: $9.81 Jim Collins E ough a paradoxical v and professional will.
Sell even the mill in Kimberly, Wisconsin, and throw all the proceeds into the consumer business, investing in brands like Huggies and Kleenex.l0 The business media called the move stupid and Wall Street analysts downgraded the stock."
Twenty-five years later, Kimberly-Clark owned Scott Paper outright and beat Procter & Gamble in six of eight product categories.12 In retirement, Smith reflected on his exceptional performance, saying simply, "I never stopped trying to become qualified for the job.
T h e term Level 5 refers to the highest level in a hierarchy of executive capabilities that we identified in our research.
We were not looking for Level 5 leadership or anything like it.
In fact, I gave the research team explicit instructions to downplay the role of top executives so that we could avoid the simplistic "credit the leader" or "blame the leader" thinking common today.
Not that we should become leadership atheists (leadership does matter), but every time we throw our hands up in frustration-reverting back to "Well, the answer must be Leadership!
So, early in the project, I kept insisting, "Ignore the executives."
The good-to-great executives were all cut from the same cloth.
All the good-to-great companies had Level 5 leadership at the time of transition.
Furthermore, the absence of Level 5 leadership showed up as a consistent pattern in the comparison companies.
Given that Level 5 leadership cuts against the grain of conventional wisdom, especially the belief that we need larger-than-life saviors with big personalities to transform companies, it is important to note that Level 5 is an empirical finding, not an ideological one.
Consider the case of Colman Mockler, C E O of Gillette from 1975 to 1991.
During Mockler s tenure, Gillette faced three attacks that threatened to destroy the company's opportunity for greatness.
Two attacks came as hostile takeover bids from Revlon, led by Ronald Perelman, a cigar-chomping raider with a reputation for breaking apart companies to pay down junk bonds and finance more hostile raids.15 The third attack came from Coniston Partners, an investment group that bought 5.9 percent of Gillette stock and initiated a proxy battle to seize control of the board, hoping to sell the company to the highest bidder and pocket a quick gain on their shared6 Had Gillette been flipped to Perelman at the price he offered, shareowners would have reaped an instantaneous 44 percent gain on their stock."
Looking at a $2.3 billion short-term stock profit across 116 million shares, most executives would have capitulated, pocketing millions from flipping their own stock and cashing in on generous golden parachutes.18 Colman Mockler did not capitulate, choosing instead to fight for the future greatness of Gillette, even though he himself would have pocketed a substantial sum on his own shares.
In the proxy fight, senior Gillette executives reached out to thousands of individual investors-person by person, phone call by phone call-and won the battle.
First, Mockler and his team staked the company's future on huge investments in radically new and technologically advanced systems (later known as Sensor and Mach3).
Had the takeover been successful, these projects would almost certainly have been curtailed or eliminated, and none of us would be shaving with Sensor, Sensor for Women, or the Mach3-leaving hundreds of millions of people to a more painful daily battle with stubble.I9 Second, at the time of the takeover battle, Sensor promised significant future profits that were not reflected in the stock price because it was in secret development.
With Sensor in mind, the board and Mockler believed that the future value of the shares far exceeded the current price, Jim Collins COLMANMOCKLER'S TRIUMPH Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, 1976 - 1996 Gillette versus Takeover Bid and Market Gillette: $95.68 44% Premium Offered in Takeover Btd /f /.r r , " - *" %d4' General Market $14 92 This chart shows how an investor would have fared under the following scenarios: 1.
$1 invested In Gillette, held from December 31, 1976 through December 31, 1996.
$1 invested in Gillette.
If a shareflipper had accepted the 44 percent price premium offered by Ronald Perelman on October 31, 1986, and then invested the full amount in the general market for ten years, through the end of 1996, he would have come out three times worse off than a shareholder who had stayed with Mockler and Gillette.20Indeed, the company, its customers, and the shareholders would have been ill served had Mockler capitulated to the raiders, pocketed his millions, and retired to a life of leisure.
O n January 25, 1991, the Gillette team received an advance copy of the cover of Forbes magazine, which featured an artist's rendition of Mockler standing atop a mountain holding a giant razor above his head in a triumphal pose, while the vanquished languish on the hillsides below.
The other G o o d to Great executives razzed the publicity-shy Mockler, who had likely declined requests to be photographed for the cover in the first place, amused at seeing him portrayed as a corporate version of Conan the Triumphant.
Walking back to his office, minutes after seeing this public acknowledgment of his sixteen years of struggle, Mockler crumpled to the floor, struck dead by a massive heart attack.21 I do not know whether Mockler would have chosen to die in harness, but I am quite confident that he would not have changed his approach as chief executive.
Ambition for the Company: Setting Up Successors for Success When David Maxwell became C E O of Fannie Mae in 1981, the company was losing $1 million every single business day.
Over the next nine years, Maxwell transformed Fannie Mae into a high-performance culture that rivaled the best Wall Street firms, earning $4 million every business day and beating the general stock market 3.8 to 1.
Shortly thereafter, Maxwell's retirement package, which had grown to be worth $20 million based on Fannie Mae's spectacular performance, became a point of controversy in Congress (Fannie Mae operates under a government charter).
He then instructed Johnson not to pay him the remaining balance-$5.5 million-and asked that the entire amount be contributed to the Fannie Mae foundation for low-income housing.22 David Maxwell, like Darwin Smith and Colman Mockler, exemplified a key trait of Level 5 leaders: ambition first and foremost for the company and concern for its success rather than for one's own riches and personal Jim Collins renown.
In over three quarters of the comparison companies, we found executives who set their successors up for failure or chose weak successors, or both.
"23 Consider the case of Rubbermaid, an unsustained comparison company that grew from obscurity to number one on Forfune's annual list of America's Most Admired Companies and then, just as quickly, disintegrated into such sorry shape that it had to be acquired by Newellto save itself.
T h e architect of this remarkable story, a charismatic and brilliant leader named Stanley Gault, became synonymous in the late 1980s with the success of the company.
In 3 12 articles collected on Rubbermaid, Gault comes through as a hard-driving, egocentric executive.
"24 In another, drawn directly from his own comments on leading change, the word I appears forty-four times ("I could lead the charge"; "I wrote the twelve objectives"; "I presented and explained the objectives"), whereas the word we appears just sixteen times.25 Gault had every reason to be proud of his executive success.
Rubbermaid generated forty consecutive quarters of earnings growth under his leadership-an impressive performance, and one that deserves respect.
~ ~ successors found themselves struga new number two e x e ~ u t i v eGault's gling not only with a management void, but also with strategic voids that would eventually bring the company to its knees.27 Of course, you might say, "Yes, Rubbermaid fell apart after Gault, but that just proves his personal greatness as a leader."
But he was not a Level 5 leader, and that is one key reason why Rubbermaid went from good to great for a brief shining moment and then, just as quickly, went from great to irrelevant.
During interviews with the good-to-great leaders, they'd talk about the company and the contributions of other executives as long as we'd like but would deflect discussion about their own contributions.
Board member Jim Hlavacek described Ken Iverson, the CEO who oversaw Nucor's transformation from near bankruptcy to one of the most successful steel companies in the world: Ken is a very modest and humble man.
He's that humble and simple.28 The eleven good-to-great CEOs are some of the most remarkable CEOs of the century, given that only eleven companies from the Fortune 500 met the exacting standards for entry into this study.
George Cain, Alan Wurtzel, David Maxwell, Colman Mockler, Darwin Smith, Jim Herring, Lyle Everingham, Joe Cullman, Fred Allen, Cork Walgreen, Carl Reichardt-how many of these extraordinary executives had you heard of?
Scott Paper, the comparison company to Kimberly-Clark, hired a C E O named Al Dunlap, a man cut from a very different cloth than Darwin Smith.
Quoted in Business Week about his nineteen months atop Scott Paper, he boasted, "The Scott story will go down in the annals of American business history as one of the most successful, quickest turnarounds ever, [making] other turnarounds pale by c o m p a r i ~ o n . "
~ ~ According to Business Week, Dunlap personally accrued $100 million for 603 days of work at Scott Paper (that's $165,000 per day), largely by slashing the workforce, cutting the R&D budget in half, and putting the company on growth steroids in preparation for sale.31After selling off the Good to Great company and pocketing his quick millions, Dunlap wrote a book about himself, in which he trumpeted his nickname Rambo in Pinstripes.
Lee Iacocca, for example, saved Chrysler from the brink of catastrophe, performing one of the most celebrated (and deservedly so) turnarounds in American business history.
Chrysler rose to a height of 2.9 times the market at a point about halfway through his tenure.
Investor's Business Daily and the Wall Street Journal chronicled how Iacocca appeared regularly on talk shows like the Today show and Larry King Live, personally starred in over eighty commercials, entertained the idea of running for president of the United States (quoted at one point, "Running Chrysler has been a bigger job than running the country.
T h e book, lacocca, sold seven million copies and elevated him to rock star status, leading him to be mobbed by thousands of cheering fans upon his arrival in Japan.34 Iacocca's personal stock soared, but in the second half of his tenure, Chrysler's stock fell 3 1 percent behind the general market.
Sadly, Iacocca had trouble leaving center stage and letting go of the perks of executive kingship.
He postponed his retirement so many times Jim Collins that insiders at Chrysler began to joke that Iacocca stood for "I Am Chairman of Chrysler Corporation Always.
"35And when he did finally retire, he demanded that the board continue to provide a private jet and stock options.36Later, he joined forces with noted takeover artist Kirk Kerkorian to launch a hostile takeover bid for C h r y ~ l e r .
~ ~ Chrysler experienced a brief return to glory in the five years after Iacocca's retirement, but the company's underlying weaknesses eventually led to a buyout by German carmaker D a i m l e r - B e n ~Certainly, .~~ the demise of Chrysler as a stand-alone company does not rest entirely on Iacocca's shoulders (the next generation of management made the fateful decision to sell the company to the Germans), but the fact remains: Iacocca s brilliant turnaround in the early 1980s did not prove to be sustained and Chrysler failed to become an enduring great company.
.. t o Do What Must Be Done It is very important to grasp that Level 5 leadership is not just about humility and modesty.
Initially, we penciled in terms like "selfless executive ' and "servant leader."
When George Cain became C E O of Abbott Laboratories, it sat in the bottom quartile of the pharmaceutical industry, a drowsy enterprise that Good to Great had lived for years off its cash cow, erythromycin.
the board and the executive team with the best people he could find, Cain made it clear that neither family ties nor length of tenure would have anything to do with whether you held a key position in the company.
If you didn't have the capacity to become the best executive in the industry in your span of responsibility, then you would lose your paycheck.39 Such rigorous rebuilding might be expected from an outsider brought in to turn the company around, but Cain was an eighteen-year veteran insider and a family member, the son of a previous Abbott president.
In the end, though, family members were quite pleased with the performance of their stock, for Cain set in motion a profitable growth machine that, from its transition date in 1974 to 2000, created shareholder returns that beat the market 4.5 to 1, handily outperforming industry superstars Merck and Pfizer.
Upjohn, the direct comparison company to Abbott, also had family leadership during the same era as George Cain.
Unlike George Cain, Upjohn's C E O never showed the same resolve to break the mediocrity of nepotism.
By the time Abbott had filled all key seats with the best people, regardless of family background, Upjohn still had B level family members holding key positions.40Virtually identical companies with identical stock charts up to the point of transition, Upjohn then fell 89 percent behind Abbott over the next twenty-one years before capitulating in a merger to Pharmacia in 1995.
In fact, going for a high-profile outside change agent is negatively correlated with a sustained transformation from good to great.
Jim Collins A superb example of insider-driven change comes from Charles R. "Cork" Walgreen 3d, who transformed dowdy Walgreens into a company that outperformed the stock market by over fifteen times from the end of 1975 to January 1, 2000.42After years of dialogue and debate within his executive team about Walgreens' food-service operations, Cork sensed that the team had finally reached a watershed point of clarity and understanding: Walgreens' brightest future lay in convenient drugstores, not food service.
He never doubted; he never second-guessed.43 Like Darwin Smith selling the mills at Kimberly-Clark, Cork Walgreen's decision required stoic resolve.
Walgreens had, after all, invented the malted milkshake and food service was a long-standing family tradition dating back to his grandfather.
Some food-service outlets were even named after the C E O himself-a restaurant chain named Corky's.
But no matter, if Walgreens had to fly in the face of long-standing family tradition in order to focus its resources where it could be the best in Good to Great the world (convenient drugstores), Cork would do it.
Alan Wurtzel, a second-generation family member who took over his family's small company and turned it into Circuit City, perfectly captured the gestalt of this trait.
When asked about differences between himself and his counterpart C E O at Circuit City's comparison company, Wurtzel summed up: "The show horse and the plow horse-he was more of a show horse, whereas I was more of a plow horse.
Let me put it this way: If you had to choose between $1 invested in Circuit City or $1 invested in General Electric on the day that the legendary Jack Welch took over G E in 1981 and held to January 1,2000, you would have been better off with Circuit City-by six times.46Not a bad performance, for a plow horse.
Yet the good-to-great executives talked a lot about luck in our interviews.
In one interview with a Jim Collins Nucor executive, we asked why the company had such a remarkable track record of good decisions; he responded: "I guess we were just Joseph F. Cullman 3d, the Level 5 transition C E O of Philip Morris, flat-out refused to take credit for his company's success, attributing his good fortune to having great colleagues, successors, and predecess o r ~Even .
The opening paragraph reads: "I was a very lucky guy from the very beginning of my life: marvelous parents, good genes, lucky in love, lucky in business, and lucky when a Yale classmate had my orders changed to report to Washington, D.C., in early 1941, instead of to a ship that was sunk with all hands lost in the North Atlantic, luck y to be in the Navy, and lucky to be alive at e i g h t y f i ~ e . "
Then we began to notice a contrasting pattern in the comparison executives: They credited substantial blame to bad luck, frequently bemoaning the difficulties of the environment they faced.
Compare Bethlehem Steel to Nucor.
Yet executives at the two companies had completely different views of the same environment.
Bethlehem Steel's C E O summed up the company's problems in 1983 by blaming imports: "Our first, second, and third problems are imports.
"51Ken Iverson and his crew at Nucor considered the same challenge from imports a blessing, a stroke of good fortune ("Aren't we lucky; steel is heavy, and they have to ship it all the way across the ocean, giving us a huge advantage!").
Iverson saw the first, second, and third problems facing the American steel industry not to be imports, but managernent5* He even went so far as to speak out publicly against government protection against imports, telling a stunned gathering of fellow steel executives in 1977 that the real problems facing the American steel industry lay in the fact that management had failed to keep pace with inn~vation.~~ The emphasis on luck turns out to be part of a pattern that we came to call the window and the mirror.
They'd look out the window for something or someone outside themselves to blame for poor results, but would , preen in front of the mirror and credit themselves when things went well.
Everyone outside the window points inside, directly at the Level 5 leader, saying, "He was the key; without his guidance and leadership, we would not have become a great company."
CULTIVATING LEVEL 5 LEADERSHIP Not long ago, I shared the Level 5 finding with a gathering of senior executives.
A woman who had recently become chief executive of her company raised her hand and said, "I believe what you say about the good-to-great leaders.
"I will simply point back to the data: Of 1,435 companies that appeared on the Fortune 500 in our initial candidate list, only eleven made the very tough cut into our study.
In those eleven, all of them had Level 5 leadership in key positions, including the CEO, at the pivotal time of transition."
Joe Cullman was profoundly affected by his World War II experiences, particularly the last-minute change of orders that took him off a doomed ship on which he surely would have died.54 A strong religious belief or conversion might also nurture development of Level 5 traits.
Colman Mockler, for example, converted to evangelical Christianity while getting his MBA at Harvard, and later, according to the book Cutting Edge, became a prime mover in a group of Boston business executives who met frequently over breakfast to discuss the carryover of religious values to corporate life.55Other leaders in our study, however, had no obvious catalytic event; they just led normal lives and somehow ended up atop the Level 5 hierarchy.
My best advice, based on the research, is to begin practicing the other good-to-great disciplines we discovered.
Leading with the other disciplines can help you move in the right direction.
Darwin Smith, Colman Mockler, Alan Wurtzel, and all the other Level 5s we learned about have become models for us, something worthy to aspire toward.
The executives who ignited the transformations from good to great did not first figure out where to drive the bus and then get people to take it there.
If people join the bus primarily because of where it is going, what happens if you get ten miles down the road and you need to change direction?
But if people are on the bus because of who else is on the bus, then it's much easier to change direction: "Hey, I got on this bus because of who else is on it; if we need to change direction to be more successful, fine with me."
Consider the case of Wells Fargo.
Wells Fargo began its fifteen-year stint of spectacular performance in 1983, but the foundation for the shift dates back to the early 1970s, when then-CEO Dick Cooley began building one of the most talented management teams in the industry (the best .~ foresaw that the team, according to investor Warren B ~ f f e t t ) Cooley banking industry would eventually undergo wrenching change, but he did not pretend to know what form that change would take.
So instead of mapping out a strategy for change, he and chairman Ernie Arbuckle focused on "injecting an endless stream of talent" directly into the veins of the company.
"If I'm not smart enough to see the changes that are coming, they will.
No one could predict all the changes that would be wrought by banking deregulation.
Yet when these changes came, no bank handled those challenges better than Wells Fargo.
At a time when its sector of the banking industry fell 59 percent behind the general stock market, Wells Fargo outperformed the market by over three times.4 Carl Reichardt, who became C E O in 1983, attributed the bank's success largely to the people around him, most of whom he inherited from Cooley.5As he listed members of the Wells Fargo executive team that had joined the company during the Cooley-Reichardt era, we were stunned.
Nearly every person had gone on to become C E O of a major company: Good to Great Bill Aldinger became the C E O of Household Finance, Jack Grundhofer became C E O of U.S. Bancorp, Frank Newman became C E O of Bankers Trust, Richard Rosenberg became C E O of Bank of America, Bob Joss became C E O of Westpac Banking (one of the largest banks in Australia) and later became dean of the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University-not exactly your garden variety executive team!
Arjay Miller, an active Wells Fargo board member for seventeen years, told us that the Wells Fargo team reminded him of the famed "Whiz Kids" recruited to Ford Motor Company in the late 1940s (of which Miller was a member, eventually becoming president of Ford).6Wells Fargo's approach was simple: You get the best people, you build them into the best managers in the industry, and you accept the fact that some of them will be recruited to become CEOs of other companies.'
While Dick Cooley systematically recruited the best people he could get his hands on, Bank of America, according to the book Breaking the Bank, followed something called the "weak generals, strong lieutenants ' model.8 If you pick strong generals for key positions, their competitors will leave.
But if you pick weak generals-placeholders, rather than highly capable executivesthen the strong lieutenants are more likely to stick around.
The weak generals model produced a climate very different at Bank of America than the one at Wells Fargo.
Whereas the Wells Fargo crew acted as a strong team of equal partners, ferociously debating eyeball-to-eyeball in search of the best answers, the Bank of America weak generals would wait for directions from above.
Sam Armacost, who inherited the weak generals model, described the management climate: "I came away quite distressed from my first couple of management meetings.
"9 A retired Bank of America executive described senior managers in the 1970s as "Plastic People" who'd been trained to quietly submit to the dictates of a domineering CEO.1 Later, after losing over $1 billion in the mid1980s, Bank of America recruited a gang of strong generals to turn the bank around.
From right across the street at Wells Fargo.
In fact, Bank of America recruited so many Wells Fargo executives during its turnaround that people inside began to refer to themselves as "Wells of America.""
From 1973 to 1998, while Jim Collins Wells Fargo went from buildup to breakthrough results, Bank of America's cumulative stock returns didn't even keep pace with the general market.
WELLS FARCO VERSUS BANK OF AMERICA Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, January 1, 1973 -January1, 1998 $80 Wells Fargo: $74.47 $40 Wells Fargo Point $20 Now, you might be thinking, "That's just good management- the idea of getting the right people around you.
It's easy to talk about paying attention to Good to Great people decisions, but how many executives have the discipline of David Maxwell, who held off on developing a strategy until he got the right people in place, while the company was losing $1 million every single business day with $56 billion of loans underwater?
When Maxwell became C E O of Fannie Mae during its darkest days, the board desperately wanted to know how he was going to rescue the company.
Despite the immense pressure to act, to do something dramatic, to seize the wheel and start driving, Maxwell focused first on getting the right people on the Fannie Mae management team.
"12 Maxwell made it absolutely clear that there would only be seats for A players who were going to put forth an A+ effort, and if you weren't up for it, you had better get off the bus, and get off now.13 O n e executive who had just uprooted his life and career to join Fannie Mae came to Maxwell and said, "I listened to you very carefully, and I don't want to do this."
He left and went back to where he came from.14In all, fourteen of twenty-six executives left the company, replaced by some of the best, smartest, and hardest-working executives in the entire world of finance.I5 The same standard applied up and down the Fannie Mae ranks as managers at every level increased the caliber of their teams and put immense peer pressure upon each other, creating high turnover at first, when some people just didn't pan out.16"We had a saying, 'You can't fake it at Fannie Mae,' " said one executive team member.
"17 Wells Fargo and Fannie Mae both illustrate the idea that "who" questions come before "what" questions-before vision, before strategy, before tactics, before organizational structure, before technology.
NOT A "GENIUS WITH A THOUSAND HELPERS" In contrast to the good-to-great companies, which built deep and strong executive teams, many of the comparison companies followed a "genius Jim Collins with a thousand helpers" model.
In this model, the company is a platform for the talents of an extraordinary individual.
If you're a genius, you don't need a Wells Fargo-caliber management team of people who could run their own shows elsewhere.
Eckerd Corporation suffered the liability of a leader who had an uncanny genius for figuring out "what" to do but little ability to assemble the right "who" on the executive team.
By the late 1970s, Eckerd's revenues equaled Walgreens', and it looked like Eckerd might triumph as the great company in the industry.
Whereas Jack Eckerd failed utterly at the single most important decision facing any executive-the selection of a successor-Cork Walgreen developed multiple outstanding candidates and selected a superstar successor, who may prove to be even better than Cork himself.20Whereas Jack Eckerd had no executive team, but instead a bunch of capable helpers assembled to assist the great genius, Cork Walgreen built the best executive team in the industry.
Whereas the primary guidance mechanism for Eckerd Corporation's strategy lay inside Jack Eckerd's head, the primary guidance mechanism for Walgreens' corporate Good to Great LEVEL 5 + MANAGEMENT TEAM A "GENIUS W IT H A THOUSAND HELPERS" (Good-to-Great Companies) (Comparison Companies) FIRST WHO Get the right people on the bus.
Build a superior executive team.
strategy lay in the group dialogue and shared insights of the talented executive team.
The "genius with a thousand helpers" model is particularly prevalent in the unsustained comparison companies.
The most classic case comes from a man known as the Sphinx, Henry Singleton of Teledyne.
Singleton grew up on a Texas ranch, with the childhood dream of becoming a great businessman in the model of the rugged individualist.
Armed with a Ph.D. from MIT, he founded Teledyne.21The name Teledyne derives from Greek and means "force applied at a distance '-an apt name, as the central force holding the far-flung empire together was Henry Singleton himself.
Through acquisitions, Singleton built the company from a small enterprise to number 293 on the Fortune 500 list in six years.22Within ten years, he'd completed more than 100 acquisitions, eventually creating a far-flung enterprise with 130 profit centers in everything from exotic metals to insurance.23Amazingly, the whole system worked, with Singleton Jim Collins TELEDYNE CORPORATION A Classic "Genius with a Thousand Helpers" Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market, January 1, 1967 -January 1, 1996 End of Singleton Era Rise under a Genius, Henry Singleton himself acting as the glue that connected all the moving parts together.
"24 A 1978 Forbes feature story maintained, "Singleton will win no awards for humility, but who can avoid standing in awe of his impressive record?"
"If there is a single weakness in this otherwise brilliant picture," the article continued, "it is this: Teledyne is not so much a system as it is the reflection of one man's singular disci- line.
From the end of 1986 until its merger with Allegheny in 1995, Teledyne's cumulative stock returns imploded, falling 66 percent behind the general stock market.
Good to Great I T ' S W H O Y O U PAY, N O T H O W Y O U PAY T H E M We expected to find that changes in incentive systems, especially executive incentives, would be highly correlated with making the leap from good to great.
With all the attention paid to executive compensation- the shift to stock options and the huge packages that have become commonplace-surely, we thought, the amount and structure of compensation must play a key role in going from good to great.
We spent weeks inputting compensation data from proxy statements and performed 112 separate analyses looking for patterns and correlations.
Most importantly, when we analyzed executive compensation patterns relative to comparison companies, we found no systematic differences on the use of stock (or not), high salaries (or not), bonus incentives (or not), or long-term compensation (or not).
The only significant difference we found was that the good-togreat executives received slightly less total cash compensation ten years after the transition than their counterparts at the still-mediocre comparison companies!26 Not that executive compensation is irrelevant.
But once you've structured something that makes basic sense, executive compensation falls away as a distinguishing variable in moving an organization from good to great.
It is simply a manifestation of the "first who" principle: It's not how you compensate your executives, it's which executives you have to compensate in the first place.
If you have the right executives on the bus, they will do everything within their power to build a great company, not because of what they will "get" for it, but because they simply cannot imagine settling for anything less.
Their moral code requires building excellence for its own sake, and you're no more likely to change that with a compensation package than you're likely to affect whether they breathe.
We were not able to look as rigorously at nonexecutive compensation; such data is not available in as systematic a format as proxy statements for top officers.
~ ~ A particularly vivid example is Nucor.
Nucor built its entire system on the idea that you can teach farmers how to make steel, but you can't teach a farmer work ethic to people who don't have it in the first place.
Nucor ejected people who did not share this work ethic, generating as high as 50 percent turnover in the first year of a plant, followed by very low turnover as the right people settled in for the long To attract and keep the best workers, Nucor paid its steelworkers more than any other steel company in the world.
But it built its pay system around a high-pressure team-bonus mechanism, with over 50 percent of a Good to Great worker's compensation tied directly to the productivity of his work team of twenty to forty people.29Nucor team members would usually show up for work thirty minutes early to arrange their tools and prepare to blast off the starting line the instant the shift gun fired.30"We have the hardest working steel workers in the world," said one Nucor executive.
"31 The Nucor system did not aim to turn lazy people into hard workers, but to create an environment where hardworking people would thrive and lazy workers would either jump or get thrown right off the bus.
In one extreme case, workers chased a lazy teammate right out of the plant with an angle iron.j2 Nucor rejected the old adage that people are your most important asset.
Nucor illustrates a key point.
As Dave Nassef of Pitney Bowes put it: I used to be in the Marines, and the Marines get a lot of credit for building people's values.
The Marine Corps recruits people who share the corps' values, then provides them with the training required to accomplish the organization's mission.
We look at it the same way at Pitney Bowes.
The answers to these questions give us insight into their core values.33 One good-to-great executive said that his best hiring decisions often came from people with no industry or business experience.
In one case, Jim Collins he hired a manager who'd been captured twice during the Second World War and escaped both times.
In 1986, Wells Fargo acquired Crocker Bank and planned to shed gobs of excess cost in the consolidation.
The Wells Fargo team concluded right up front that the vast majority of Crocker managers would be the wrong people on the bus.
Crocker people had long been steeped in the traditions and perks of old-style banker culture, complete with a marbled executive dining room with its own chef and $500,000 worth of china.j5 Quite a contrast to the spartan culture at Wells Fargo, where management ate food prepared by a college dormitory food service.36Wells Fargo made it clear to the Crocker managers: "Look, this is not a merger of equals; it's an acquisition; we bought your branches and your customers; we didn't acquire you."
Wells Fargo terminated most of the Crocker management team-1,600 Crocker managers gone on day one- including nearly all the top executive^.^' A critic might say, "That's just the Wells people protecting their own."
But consider the following fact: Wells Fargo also sent some of its own managers packing in cases where the Crocker managers were judged as better qualified.
When it came to management, the Wells Fargo stan/- Good to Great dards were ferocious and consistent.
Summed up one Wells Fargo executive: "The only way to deliver to the people who are achieving is to not burden them with the people who are not achie~ing.
But the evidence suggests that the average Crocker manager was just not the same caliber as the average Wells manager and would have failed in the Wells Fargo performance culture.
One senior Wells Fargo executive told us: "We all agreed this was an acquisition, not a merger, and there's no sense beating around the bush, not being straightforward with people.
First, Wells Fargo did fewer big layoffs than its comparison .~~ upper management, including company, Bank of A r n e r i ~ a Second, some senior Wells Fargo upper management, suffered more on a percentage basis than lower-level workers in the c o n ~ o l i d a t i o nRigor .
Even in the Wells Fargo case, the company used layoffs half as much as Bank of America during the transition era.
Six of the eleven good-to-great companies recorded zero layoffs from ten years before the breakthrough date all the way through 1998, and four others reported only one or two layoffs.
In contrast, we found layoffs used five times more frequently in the comparison companies than in the good-to-great companies.
Some of the comparison companies had an almost chronic addiction to layoffs and restructuring~.~~ It would be a mistake-a tragic mistake, indeed-to think that the way you ignite a transition from good to great is by wantonly swinging the ax on vast numbers of hardworking people.
Endless restructuring and mindless hacking were never part of the good-to-great model.
How to Be Rigorous We've extracted three practical disciplines from the research for being rigorous rather than ruthless.
One of the immutable laws of management physics is "Packard's Law."
(So called because we first learned it in a previous research project from David Packard, cofounder of the Hewlett-Packard Company.)
It goes like this: No company can grow revenues consistently faster than its ability to get enough of the right people to implement that growth and still become a great company.
Good to Great The management team at Circuit City instinctively understood Packard's Law.
Driving around Santa Barbara the day after Christmas a few pears ago, I noticed something different about the Circuit City store.
But not Circuit City.
A huge part of our transition can be attributed to our discipline in picking the right people."
Bruckart then recalled a conversation with C E O Alan Wurtzel during a growth spurt at Circuit City: " 'Alan, I'm really wearing down trying to find the exact right person to fill this position or that position.
7743 One of the key contrasts between Alan Wurtzel at Circuit City and Sidney Cooper at Silo is that Wurtzel spent the bulk of his time in the early years focused on getting the right people on the bus, whereas Cooper spent 80 percent of his time focusing on the right stores to Wurtzel's first goal was to build the best, most professional management team in the industry; Cooper's first goal was simply to grow as fast as possible.
Circuit City put tremendous emphasis on getting the right people all up and down the line, from delivery drivers to vice presidents; Silo developed a reputation for not being able to do the basics, like making home deliveries without damaging the products.45 According to Circuit City's Dan Rexinger, "We made the best home delivery drivers in the industry.
We told them, 'You are the last contact the customer has with Circuit City.
The change in the way we handled customers when making a delivery was absolutely incredible.
"46 Five years into Wurtzel's tenure, Circuit City and Silo had essentially the same business strategy (the same answers to the "what" questions), yet Circuit City took off like a rocket, beating the general stock market 18.5 to 1 in the fifteen years after its transition, while Silo Jim Collins bumped along until it was finally acquired by a foreign company.47Same strategy, different people, different results.
Practical Discipline #2: When you know you need to make a people change, act.
Good to Great Using data from Moody's Company Information Reports, we were able to examine the pattern of turnover in the top management levels.
But we did find differences in the pattern of churn.48 T h e good-to-great leaders did not pursue an expedient "try a lot of people and keep who works" model of management.
When Colman Mockler became C E O of Gillette, he didn't go on a rampage, wantonly throwing people out the windows of a moving bus.
"49Similarly, Alan Wurtzel of Circuit City sent us a letter after reading an early draft of this chapter, wherein he commented: Your point about "getting the right people on the bus" as compared to other companies is dead on.
In the early 1960s, R. J. Reynolds and Philip Morris derived the vast majority of their revenues from the domestic arena.
R. J. Reynolds' approach to international business was, "If somebody out there in the world wants a Camel, let them call us.
"50Joe Cullman at Philip Morris had a different view.
He pulled his number one executive, George Weissman, off the primary domestic business, and put him in charge of international.
At the time, international amounted to almost nothing-a tiny export department, a struggling investment in Venezuela, another in Australia, and a tiny operation in Canada.
"52 Yet, as Forbes magazine observed twenty years later, Cullman's decision to move Weissman to the smallest part of the business was a stroke of genius.
In fact, under Weissman's stew- Good to Great ardship, Marlboro became the best-selling cigarette in the world three years before it became number one in the United States.53 The RJR versus Philip Morris case illustrates a common pattern.
For instance, when Kimberly-Clark sold the mills, Darwin Smith made it clear: The company might be getting rid of the paper business, but it would keep its best people.
We interviewed Dick Appert, a senior executive who spent the majority of his career in the papermaking division at Kimberly-Clark, the same division sold off to create funds for the company's big move into consumer products.
He talked with pride and excitement about the transformation of Kimberly-Clark, how it had the guts to sell the paper mills, how it had the foresight to exit the paper business and throw the proceeds into the consumer business, and how it had taken on Procter & Gamble.
T h e right people want to be part of building something great, and Dick Appert saw that Kimberly-Clark could become great by selling the part of the company where he had spent most of his working life.
The Philip Morris and Kimberly-Clark cases illustrate a final point Jim Collins about "the right people."
We noticed a Level 5 atmosphere at the top executive level of every good-to-great company, especially during the key transition years.
Not that every executive on the team became a fully evolved Level 5 leader to the same degree as Darwin Smith or Colman Mockler, but each core member of the team transformed personal ambition into ambition for the company.
This suggests that the team members had Level 5 potential-or at least they were capable of operating in a manner consistent with the Level 5 leadership style.
You might be wondering, "What's the difference between a Level 5 executive team member and just being a good soldier?"
A Level 5 executive team member does not blindly acquiesce to authority and is a strong leader in her own right, so driven and talented that she builds her arena into one of the very best in the world.
An article on Philip Morris said of the Cullman era, "These guys never agreed on anything and they would argue about everything, and they would kill each other and involve everyone, high and low, talented people.
"No ~ ~matter how much they argued, said a Philip Morris executive, "they were always in search of the best answer.
I spent a few short days with a senior Gillette executive and his wife at an executive conference in Hong Kong.
During the course of our conversations, I asked them if they thought Colman Mockler, the C E O most responsible for Gillette's transition from good to great, had a great life.
Colman's life revolved around three great loves, they told me: his family, Harvard, and Gillette.
Even during the darkest and most intense times of the takeover crises of the 1980s and despite the increasingly global nature of Gillette's business, Mockler maintained remarkable balance in his life.
He maintained his disciplined worship practices.
~ ~ When I asked how Mockler accomplished all of this, the executive said, "Oh, it really wasn't that hard for him.
T h e executive went on to explain that he was just as likely to meet Mockler in the hardware store as at the office.
Then the executive's wife added, "When Colman died and we all went to the funeral, I looked around and realized how much love was in the room.
And the statement rang a bell for me, as there was something about the good-to-great executive teams that I couldn't quite describe, but that clearly set them apart.
In wrapping up our interview with George Weissman of Philip Morris, I commented, "When you talk about your time at the company, it's as if you are describing a love affair."
Weissman and many of his executive colleagues kept offices at Philip Morris, coming in on a regu- Jim Collins lar basis, long after retirement.
A corridor at the Philip Morris world headquarters is called "the hall of the wizards of was.
Similarly, Dick Appert of Kimberly-Clark said in his interview, "I never had anyone in Kimberly-Clark in all my forty-one years say anything unkind to me.
A number of the executives characterized their years on the good-to-great teams as the high point of their lives.
Jim Collins C H A P T E R There is no worse mistake in public leadership than to hold out false hopes soon to be swept away.
C H U R C H I L L , The Hinge of Fate1 n the early 1950s, the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, commonly known as A&P, stood as the largest retailing organization in the world and one of the largest corporations in the United States, at one point ranking behind only General Motors in annual sales.2 Kroger, in contrast, stood as an unspectacular grocery chain, less than half the size of A&P, with performance that barely kept pace with the general market.
Then in the 1960s, A&P began to falter while Kroger began to lay the foundations for a transition into a great company.
From 1959 to 1973, both companies lagged behind the market, with Kroger pulling just a bit ahead of A&P.
After that, the two companies completely diverged, and over the next twenty-five years, Kroger generated cumulative returns ten times the market and eighty times better than A&P.
Kroger transition point occurred in 1973.
KROGER, A&P, AND THE MARKET Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, 1973 - 1998 Kroger: $198.47 Notes: 1 Kroger transition point occurred in 1973 2 Chart shows value of $1 tnvested on January 1.1973 3.
Good to Great A&P had a perfect model for the first half of the twentieth century, when two world wars and a depression imposed frugality upon Americans: cheap, plentiful groceries sold in utilitarian stores.
But in the affluent second half of the twentieth century, Americans changed.
Now, right off the bat, you might be thinking: "Okay, so the story of A&P is one of an aging company that had a strategy that was right for the times, but the times changed and the world passed it by as younger, betterattuned companies gave customers more of what they wanted.
Here's what's interesting: Both Kroger and A&P were old companies (Kroger at 82 years, A&P at 111 years) heading into the 1970s; both companies had nearly all their assets invested in traditional grocery stores; both companies had strongholds outside the major growth areas of the United States; and both companies had knowledge of how the world around them was changing.
Yet one of these two companies confronted the brutal facts of reality head-on and completely changed its entire system in response; the other stuck its head in the sand.
In 1958, Forbes magazine described A&P as "the Hermit Kingdom," run as an absolute monarchy by an aging prince.3 Ralph Burger, the successor to the Hartford brothers who had built the A&P dynasty, sought to preserve two things above all else: cash dividends for the family foundation and the past glory of the Hartford brothers.
Never mind the fact that he was already dead.6 As the brutal facts about the mismatch between its past model and the changing world began to pile up, A&P mounted an increasingly spirited defense against those facts.
In one series of events, the company opened a new store called The Golden Key, a separate brand wherein it could experiment with new methods and models to learn what customers wanted.
What did A&P executives do with The Golden Key?
"1 Meanwhile, over at Kroger, a completely different pattern arose.
Kroger also conducted experiments in the 1960s to test the superstore concept."
By 1970, the Kroger executive team came to an inescapable conclusion: T h e old-model grocery store (which accounted for nearly 100 percent of Kroger's business) was going to become extinct.
Unlike A&P, however, Kroger confronted this brutal truth and acted on it.
The rise of Kroger is remarkably simple and straightforward, almost maddeningly so.
"12 Kroger decided to eliminate, change, or replace every single store and depart every region that did not fit the new realities.
By the early 1990s, Kroger had rebuilt its entire system on the new model and was well on the way to becoming the number one grocery chain in America, a position it would attain in 1999.13Meanwhile, A&P still had over half its stores in the old 1950s size and had dwindled to a sad remnant of a once-great American institution.14 FACTS ARE BETTER THAN D R E A M S One of the dominant themes from our research is that breakthrough results come about by a series of good decisions, diligently executed and accumulated one on top of another.
Even more important, on the really big choices, such as Kroger s decision to throw all its resources into the task of converting its entire system to the superstore concept, they were remarkably on target.
The good-to-great companies displayed two distinctive forms of disciplined thought.
The first, and the topic of this chapter, is that they infused the entire process with the brutal facts of reality.
Kroger, like all good-to-great companies, developed its ideas by paying attention to the data right in front of it, not by following trends and fads set by others.
When, as in the Kroger case, you start with an honest and diligent effort to determine the truth of the situation, the right decisions often become self-evident.
And even if all decisions do not become self-evident, one thing is certain: You absolutely cannot make a series of good decisions without first confronting the brutal facts.
Consider Pitney Bowes versus Addressograph.
Both companies held near-monopoly market positions with virtually the same customer basePitney Bowes in postage meters and Addressograph in address-duplicating machines-and both faced the imminent reality of losing their monopolies.15By 2000, however, Pitney Bowes had grown to over 30,000 employees and revenues in excess of $4 billion, compared to the sorry remnants of Addressograph, which had less than $100 million and only 670 employees.16 For the shareholder, Pitney Bowes outperformed Addressograph 3,581 to 1 (yes, three thousand five hundred and eighty-one times better).
In 1976, a charismatic visionary leader named Roy Ash became CEO of Addressograph.
A self-described "conglomerateur," Ash had previously built Litton by stacking acquisitions together that had since faltered.
According to Fortune, he sought to use Addressograph as a platform to reestablish his leadership prowess in the eyes of the world.17 Ash set forth a vision to dominate the likes of IBM, Xerox, and Kodak in the emerging field of office automation-a bold plan for a company that had previously only dominated the envelope-address-duplication business.18There is nothing wrong with a bold vision, but Ash became so wedded to his quixotic quest that, according to Business Week, he refused to confront the mounting evidence that his plan was doomed to fail and might take down the rest of the company with it.19 He insisted on milking cash from profitable arenas, eroding the core business while throwing money after a gambit that had little chance of success.20 Later, after Ash was thrown out of office and the company had filed for bankruptcy (from which it did later emerge), he still refused to confront reality, saying: "We lost some battles, but we were winning the war.
"21But I Good to Great PITNEYBOWES VERSUS ADDRESSOGRAPH Annual Revenues, 1963-1 998 Constant 1998 Dollars, in Millions Pitney Bowes Addressograph was not even close to winning the war, and people throughout the company knew it at the time.
Yet the truth went unheard until it was too late.22In fact, many of Addressograph's key people bailed out of the company, dispirited by their inability to get top management to deal with the facts.23 Perhaps we should give Mr. Ash some credit for being a visionary who tried to push his company to greater heights.
(And, to be fair, the Addressograph board fired Ash before he had a chance to fully carry out his plans.
"25That quote, from Pitney Bowes executive Fred Purdue, could have come from any of the Pitney Bowes executives we interviewed.
~ ' Pitney's first management meeting of the new year typically consisted of about fifteen minutes discussing the previous year (almost always superb results) and two hours talking about the "scary squiggly things" that might impede future results.28Pitney Bowes sales meetings were quite different from the "aren't we great" rah-rah sales conferences typical at most companies: The entire management team would lay itself open to searing questions and challenges from salespeople who dealt directly with cust o m e r ~The .
~ ~company created a long-standing tradition of forums where people could stand up and tell senior executives what the company was doing wrong, shoving rocks with squiggly things in their faces, and saying, "Look!
"30 The Addressograph case, especially in contrast to Pitney Bowes, illustrates a vital point.
Strong, charismatic leaders like Roy Ash can all too easily become the de facto reality driving a company.
We did not find this pattern at companies like Wells Fargo and Pitney Bowes, where people were much more worried about the scary squiggly things than about the feelings of top management.
This is one of the key reasons why less charismatic leaders often produce better long-term results than their more charismatic counterparts.
Good to Great Winston Churchill understood the liabilities of his strong personality, and he compensated for them beautifully during the Second World War.
"31 Armed with this bold vision, Churchill never failed, however, to confront the most brutal facts.
He feared that his towering, charismatic personality might deter bad news from reaching him in its starkest form.
So, early in the war, he created an entirely separate department outside the normal chain of command, called the Statistical Office, with the principal function of feeding him-continuously updated and completely unfiltered-the most brutal facts of reality.j2 He relied heavily on this special unit throughout the war, repeatedly asking for facts, just the facts.
"33 A CLIMATE W H E R E THE TRUTH I S HEARD Now, you might be wondering, "How do you motivate people with brutal facts?
Doesn't motivation flow chiefly from a compelling vision?"
Lead with questions, not answers.
At the time, the company (then named Wards, not to be confused with Montgomery Ward) was a hodgepodge of appliance and hi-fi stores with no unifying concept.
Over the next ten years, Wurtzel and his team not only turned the company around, but also created the Circuit City concept and laid the foundations for a stunning record of results, beating the market twentytwo times from its transition date in 1982 to January 1, 2000.
Unlike leaders such as Roy Ash of Addressograph, Wurtzel resisted the urge to walk in with "the answer."
Instead, once he put the right people on the bus, he began not with answers, but with questions.
He used the same approach with his executive team, constantly pushing and probing and prodding with questions.
or as a way to blame or put down others ("Why did you mess this up?
When we asked the executives about their management team meetings during the transition era, they said that they spent much of the time "just trying to understand."
Instead, they would start with questions like: "So, what's on your mind?"
In 1965, you could hardly find a company more awful than Nucor.
At the time, Nucor was officially known as the Nuclear Corporation of America, reflecting its orientation to nuclear energy products, including the Scintillation Probe (yes, they really named it that), used for radiation measurement.
At the start of its transformation in 1965, Nucor did not manufacture one ounce of steel.
Thirty years later, and by 1999 Nucor stood as the fourth-largest steelmaker in the made greater annual profits than any other American steel company.36 How did Nucor transition from the utterly awful Nuclear Corporation of America into perhaps the best steel company in America?
First, Nucor benefited from the emergence of a Level 5 leader, Ken Iverson, promoted to C E O from general manager of the joist division.
Nearly all the Nucor executives we spoke with described a climate of debate, wherein the company's strategy "evolved through many agonizing arguments and fights.040 Good to Great 3.
Conduct autopsies, without blame.
In 1978, Philip Morris acquired the Seven-Up Company, only to sell it eight years later at a loss.41T h e financial loss was relatively small compared to Philip Morris's total assets, but it was a highly visible black eye that consumed thousands of hours of precious management time.
In our interviews with the Philip Morris executives, we were struck by how they all brought up the debacle on their own and discussed it openly.
Yet, as much as they talked about this conspicuous failure, no one pointed fingers to single out blame.
In an era when leaders go to great lengths to preserve the image of their own track record-stepping forth to claim credit about how they were visionary when their colleagues were not, but finding others to blame when their decisions go awry-it is quite refreshing to come Jim Collins across Cullman.
Bethlehem Steel executives had known for years about the threat of mini-mill companies like Nucor.
They paid little attention until they woke up one day to discover large chunks of market share taken away.43 Upjohn had plenty of information that indicated some of its forthcoming products would fail to deliver anticipated results or, worse, had potentially serious side effects.
With Halcion, for example, an insider was quoted in Newsweek saying, "dismissing safety concerns about Halcion had become virtual company policy."
In another case when Upjohn found itself under fire, it framed its problems as "adverse publicity," rather than confronting the truth of its own s h o r t ~ o m i n g s .
In contrast, Carl Reichardt of Wells Fargo, called the ultimate realist by his predecessor, hit the brutal facts of deregulation head-on.45Sorry, fellow bankers, but we can preserve the banker class no more.
We've got to be businessmen with as much attention to costs and effectiveness as McDonald's.
Good to Great One particularly powerful way to accomplish this is through red flag mechanisms.
When teaching by the case method at Stanford Business School, I issued to each MBA student an 8.5" x 11" bright red sheet of paper, with the following instructions: "This is your red flag for the quarter.
I got the idea for red flag mechanisms from Bruce Woolpert, who instituted a particularly powerful device called short pay at his company Graniterock.
The customer does not need to Jim Collins return the product, nor does he need to call Graniterock for permission.
To be clear, we did not generally find red flag mechanisms as vivid and dramatic as short pay in the good-to-great companies.
Hornung, who helped me systematically research and collate mechanisms across companies for a different research project, makes the compelling argument that if you're a fully developed Level 5 leader, you might not need red flag mechanisms.
But if you are not yet a Level 5 leader, or if you suffer the liability of charisma, red flag mechanisms give you a practical and useful tool for turning information into information that cannot be ignored and for creating a climate where the truth is heard.
* UNWAVERING FAITH A M I D THE BRUTAL FACTS When Procter & Gamble invaded the paper-based consumer business in the late 1960s, Scott Paper (then the leader) simply resigned itself to second place without a fight and began looking for ways to diversify.46"The company had a meeting for analysts in 1971 that was one of the most depressing I've ever attended," said one analyst.
Conceding the top end of the market to P&G, Scott hoped that, by hiding away in "For a more complete discussion of mechanisms, see the article "Turning Goals into Results: The Power of Catalytic Mechanisms," Hanard Business Review, July-August, 1999.
Good to Great the B category, it would be left alone by the big monster that had invaded its turf.49 Kimberly-Clark, on the other hand, viewed competing against Procter & Gamble not as a liability, but as an asset.
Darwin Smith and his team felt exhilarated by the idea of going up against the best, seeing it as an opportunity to make Kimberly-Clark better and stronger.
They beat the hell out of every one of their competitors, except one, Kimberly-Clark.
"51 Robert Aders of Kroger summed this up nicely at the end of his interview, describing the psychology of the Kroger team as it faced the daunting twenty-year task of methodically turning over the entire Kroger system.
We had a very strong will to live, the sense that we are Kroger, Kroger was here before and will be here long after we are gone, and, by god, we are going Jim Collins to win this thing.
It might take us a hundred years, but we will persist for a hundred years, if that's what it takes.7752 Throughout our research, we were continually reminded of the "hardiness" research studies done by the International Committee for the Study of Victimization.
When Fannie Mae began its transition in the early 1980s, almost no one gave it high odds for success, much less for greatness.
Fannie Mae had $56 billion of loans that were losing money.
Furthermore, by charter, Fannie Mae could not diversify outside the mortgage finance business.
Most people viewed Fannie Mae as totally beholden to shifts in the direction of interest rates-they go up and Fannie Mae loses, they go down and Fannie Mae wins-and many believed that Fannie Mae could succeed only if the government stepped in to clamp down on interest rates.54"That's their only hope," said one analyst.55 But that's not the way David Maxwell and his newly assembled team viewed the situation.
They never wavered in their faith, consistently emphasizing in their interviews with us that they never had the goal to merely survive but to prevail in the end as a great company.
Fannie Mae had no choice but to become the best capital markets player in the world at managing mortgage interest risk.
Maxwell and his team set out to create a new business model that would depend much less on interest rates, involving the invention of very sophisticated mortgage finance instruments.
"That's like Chrysler [then asking for federal loan guarantees to stave off bankruptcy] going into the aircraft business.
We were going to use the calamity as an opportunity to remake Fannie Mae into a great company.
"57 During a research meeting, a team member commented that Fannie Mae reminded her of an old television show, The Six Million Dollar Man with Lee Majors.
Instead of just trying to save the patient, doctors completely redesign him into a superhuman cyborg, installing atomic-powered robotic devices such as a powerful left eye and mechanical limbs.58Similarly, David Maxwell and his team didn't use the fact that Fannie Mae was bleeding and near death as a pretext to merely restructure the company.
Step by step, day by day, month by month, the Fannie Mae team rebuilt the entire business model around risk management and reshaped the corporate culture into a high-performance machine that rivaled an y thing on Wall Street, eventually generating stock returns nearly eight times the market over fifteen years.
THE STOCKDALE PARADOX Of course, not all good-to-great companies faced a dire crisis like Fannie Mae; fewer than half did.
But every good-to-great company faced significant adversity along the way to greatness, of one sort or another-Gillette and the takeover battles, Nucor and imports, Wells Fargo and deregulation, Pitney Bowes losing its monopoly, Abbott Labs and a huge product recall, Kroger and the need to replace nearly 100 percent of its stores, and so forth.
O n the one hand, they stoically accepted the brutal facts of reality.
O n the other hand, they maintained an unwavering faith in the endgame, and a commitment to prevail as a great company despite the brutal facts.
We came to call this duality the Stockdale Paradox.
The name refers to Admiral Jim Stockdale, who was the highestranking United States military officer in the "Hanoi Hilton" prisoner-ofwar camp during the height of the Vietnam War.
Tortured over twenty times during his eight-year imprisonment from 1965 to 1973, Stockdale lived out the war without any prisoner's rights, no set release date, and no Jim Collins certainty as to whether he would even survive to see his family again.
He exchanged secret intelligence information with his wife through their letters, knowing that discovery would mean more torture and perhaps death.
He instituted an elaborate internal communications system to reduce the sense of isolation that their captors tried to create, which used a five-by-five matrix of tap codes for alpha characters.
(Tap-tap equals the letter a, tap-pause-tap-tap equals the letter b, tap-tap-pause-tap equals the letter f; and so forth, for twenty-five letters, c doubling in for k.) At one point, during an imposed silence, the prisoners mopped and swept the central yard using the code, swish-swashing out "We love you" to Stockdale, on the third anniversary of his being shot down.
After his release, Stockdale became the first three-star officer in the history of the navy to wear both aviator wings and the Congressional Medal of Honor.59 You can understand, then, my anticipation at the prospect of spending part of an afternoon with Stockdale.
One of my students had written his paper on Stockdale, who happened to be a senior research fellow studying the Stoic philosophers at the Hoover Institution right across the street from my office, and Stockdale invited the two of us for lunch.
In preparation, I read In Love and War, the book Stockdale and his wife had written in alternating chapters, chronicling their experiences during those eight years.
"I never lost faith in the end of the story," he said, when I asked him.
I didn't say anything for many minutes, and we continued the slow walk toward the faculty club, Stockdale limping and arc-swinging his stiff leg that had never fully recovered from repeated torture.
You must never confuse faith that you will prevail in the end- which you can never afford to lose-with the discipline to confront the most brutal facts of your current reality, whatever they might be."
To this day, I carry a mental image of Stockdale admonishing the optimists: "We're not getting out by Christmas; deal with it!"
That conversation with Admiral Stockdale stayed with me, and in fact had a profound influence on my own development.
We will all experience disappointments and crushing events somewhere along the way, setbacks for which there is no "reason," no one to blame.
What separates people, Stockdale taught me, is not the presence or Jim Collins absence of difficulty, but how they deal with the inevitable difficulties of life.
In wrestling with life's challenges, the Stockdale Paradox (you must retain faith that you will prevail in the end and you must also confront the most brutal facts of your current reality) has proved powerful for coming back from difficulties not weakened, but stronger-not just for me, but for all those who've learned the lesson and tried to apply it.
I never really considered my walk with Stockdale as part of my research into great companies, categorizing it more as a personal rather than corporate lesson.
Finally, one day during a research-team meeting, I shared the Stockdale story.
Then Duane Duffy, a quiet and thoughtful team member who had done the A&P versus Kroger analysis, said, "That's exactly what I've been struggling with.
I've been trying to get my hands around the essential difference between A&P and Kroger.
Kroger was like Stockdale, and A&P was like the optimists who always thought they'd be out by Christmas."
Then other team members began to chime in, noting the same difference between their comparison sets-Wells Fargo versus Bank of America both facing deregulation, Kimberly-Clark versus Scott Paper both facing the terrible might of Procter & Gamble, Pitney Bowes versus Addressograph both facing the loss of their monopolies, Nucor versus Bethlehem Steel both facing imports, and so forth.
They all demonstrated this paradoxical psychological pattern, and we dubbed it the Stockdale Paradox.
The Stockdale Paradox is a signature of all those who create greatness, be it in leading their own lives or in leading others.
Churchill had it during the Second World War.
Admiral Stockdale, like Viktor Frankl before him, lived it in a prison camp.
And while our good-to-great companies cannot claim to have experienced either the grandeur of saving the free Good to Great world or the depth of personal experience of living in a POW camp, they all embraced the Stockdale Paradox.
It didn't matter how bleak the situation or how stultifying their mediocrity, they all maintained unwavering faith that they would not just survive, but prevail as a great company.
And yet, at the same time, they became relentlessly disciplined at confronting the most brutal facts of their current reality.
They were able to do so in large part because they operated from both sides of the Stockdale Paradox, never letting one side overshadow the other.
- S CRIBES OF D ELPHI, via Plato l e you a hedgehog or a fox?
=--- lirn Collins Consider the case of Walgreens versus Eckerd.
Recall how Walgreens generated cumulative stock returns from the end of 1975 to 2000 that exceeded the market by over fifteen times, handily beating such great companies as GE, Merck, Coca-Cola, and Intel.
That's the breakthrough strategy that Walgreens used to beat Intel, GE, Coca-Cola, and Merck.
In classic hedgehog style, Walgreens took this simple concept and implemented it with fanatical consistency.
If a great corner location would open up just half a block away from a profitable Walgreens store in a good location, the company would close the good store (even at a cost of $1 million to get out of the lease) to open a great new store on the c ~ r n e rWalgreens .~ pioneered drive-through pharmacies, found customers liked the idea, and built hundreds of them.
In urban areas, the company clustered its stores tightly together, on the precept that no one should have to walk more than a few blocks to reach a%algreem6 In downtown San Francisco, for example, Walgreens clustered nine stores within a one-mile radius.
Nine store^!^ If you look closely, you will see Walgreens stores as densely packed in some cities as Starbucks coffee shops in Seattle.
Walgreens then linked its convenience concept to a simple economic idea, profit per customer visit.
By adding high-margin ser- Good t o Great WALCREENS VERSUS SELECTED GREAT COMPANIES Cumulative Stock Returns of $1 Invested, December 31, 1975 - January 1,2000 Walgreens:$562 vices, like one-hour photo developing, Walgreens increased its profit per customer visit.
Store by store, block by block, city by city, region by region, Walgreens became more and more of a hedgehog with this incredibly simple idea.
In a world overrun by management faddists, brilliant visionaries, ranting futurists, fearmongers, motivational gurus, and all the rest, it's refreshing to see a company succeed so brilliantly by taking one simple concept and just doing it with excellence and imagination.
While Walgreens stuck only to cities where it could implement the conveniencelclustering concept, we found no evidence of a similarly coherent concept for growth at Eckerd.
Deal makers to the core, Eckerd's executives compulsively leapt at opportunities to acquire clumps of stores-forty-two units here, thirty-six units there-in hodgepodge fashion, with no obvious unifying theme.
lim Collins While Walgreens executives understood that profitable growth would come by pruning away all that did not fit with the Hedgehog Concept, Eckerd executives lurched after growth for growth's sake.
In the early 1980s, just as Walgreens became religious about carrying out its convenient drugstore concept, Eckerd threw itself into the home video market with its purchase of American Home Video Corporation.
Eckerd's C E O told Forbes magazine in 1981, "Some feel the purer we are the better we'll be.
"^ Eckerd's home video foray produced $3 1 million in losses before Eckerd sold it to Tandy, which crowed that it got the deal for $72 million below book value.9 In the precise year of Eckerd's American Home Video acquisition, Walgreens and Eckerd had virtually identical revenues ($1.7 billion).
Ten years later, Walgreens had grown to over twice the revenues of Eckerd, accumulating net profits $1 billion greater than Eckerd over the decade.
Twenty years later, Walgreens was going strong, as one of the most sustained transformations in our study.
Meanwhile, Eckerd ceased to exist as an independent company.10 THE THREE CIRCLES The notion of a Hedgehog Concept originated in our research team meetings when we were trying to make sense of Walgreens' spectacular returns.
I mean, look at Kroger with the superstore concept, or Kimberly-Clark with the Good to Great move to paper-based consumer products, or Walgreens with convenient drugstores.
After a few months of sifting and sorting, considering possibilities and tossing them out, we finally came to see that the Hedgehog Concept in each good-to-great company wasn't just any random simple idea.
More precisely, a Hedgehog Concept is a simple, crystalline concept that flows fiom deep understanding about the intersection of the following three circles: 1.
This discerning standard goes far beyond core competence.
Just because you possess a core competence doesn't necessarily mean you c'an be the best in the world at it.
If you could drive toward the intersection of these three circles and translate that intersection into a simple, crystalline concept that guided your life choices, then you'd have a Hedgehog Concept for yourself.
Good to Great To have a fully developed Hedgehog Concept, you need all three circles.
So wrote Warren Buffett about his $290 million investment in Wells Fargo despite his serious reservations about the banking industry.
'* Prior to clarifying its Hedgehog Concept, Wells Fargo had tried to be a global bank, operating like a mini-Citicorp, and a mediocre one at that.
Then, at first under Dick Cooley and then under Carl Reichardt, Wells Fargo executives began to ask themselves a piercing set of questions: What can we potentially do better than any other company, and, equally important, what can we not do better than any other company?
Putting aside their egos, the Wells Fargo team pulled the plug on the vast majority of its international operations, accepting the truth that it could not be better than Citicorp in global banking.13 Wells Fargo then turned its attention to what it could be the best in the world at: running a bank like a business, with a focus on the western United States.
That was the essence of the Hedgehog Concept that turned Wells Fargo from a mediocre Citicorp wanna-be to one of the best-performing banks in the world.
Carl Reichardt, CEO of Wells Fargo at the time of transition, stands as a consummate hedgehog.
While his counterparts at Bank of America went into a reaction-revolution panic mode in response to deregulation, hiring change gurus who used sophisticated models and time-consusing encounter groups, Reichardt stripped everything down to its essential simplicity.14"It's not space science stuff," he told us in our interview.
The Wells Fargo focus on its Hedgehog Concept was so intense that it became, in its executives' own words, "a mantra."
Throughout our interviews, Wells Fargo people echoed the same basic theme-"It wasn't that complicated.
Consider the contrast between Abbott Laboratories and Upjohn.
But then, in 1974, Abbott had a breakthrough in performance, producing cumulative returns of 4.0 times the market and 5.5 times Upjohn over the next fifteen years.
One crucial difference @tween the two companies is that Abbott developed a Hedgehog Concept based on what it could be the best at and Upjohn did not.
Abbott began by confronting the brutal facts.
So, guided by a Level 5 leader and tapping into the faith side of the Stockdale Paradox (There must be a way for us to prevail as a great company, and we will find it!
Abbott eventually became the number one company in both of these arenas, which moved it far down the path of becoming the best company in the world at creating products that make health care more cost-effective.18 Upjohn never confronted the same brutal reality and continued to live with the delusion that it could beat Merck.19 Later, when it fell even further behind the pharmaceutical leaders, it diversified into arenas where it definitely could not be the best in the world, such as plastics and chemicals.
As Upjohn fell even further behind, it returned to a focus on ethical drugs, yet never confronted the fact that it was just too small to win in the big-stakes pharmaceutical gameS2ODespite consistently spending nearly twice the percentage of sales on R&D as Abbott, Upjohn saw its profits dwindle to less than half those of Abbott before being acquired in 1995.21 roo lim Collins Clearly, a Hedgehog Concept is not the same as a core competence.
To use an analogy, consider the young person who gets straight A's in high school calculus and scores high on the math part of the SAT, demonstrating a core competence at mathematics.
Suffering from the curse of competence but lacking a clear Hedgehog Concept, they rarely become great at what they do.
The Hedgehog Concept requires a severe standard of excellence.
Like Upjohn, the comparison companies stuck to businesses at which they were "good" but could never be the best, or worse, launched off in pursuit of easy growth and profits in arenas where they had no hope of being the best.
Abbott Laboratories: Could become the best at creating a product portfolio that lowers the cost of health care.
Circuit City: Could become the best at implementing the "4-S" model (service, selection, savings, satisfaction) applied to bigticket consumer sales.
Notes: Circuit City saw that it could become "the McDonald's" of big-ticket retailing, able to operate a geographcally dispersed system by remote control.
Its distinction lay not in the "4-s'' see (1) that it could be a full capital markets player as good as any on Wall Street and (2) that it could develop a unique capability to assess risk in i jim Collins Gillette: Could become the best at building premier global brands of daily necessities that require sophisticated manufacturing technology.
Kimberly-Clark: Could become the best in the world at paper-based consumer products.
Notes: Gillette saw that it had an unusual combination of two very different skills: (1) the ability to manufacture billions of low-cost, super-high-tolerance products (e.g., razor blades) and (2) the ability to build global consumer brands-the "Coke" of blades or toothbrushes.
Notes: Kimberly-Clark realized that it had a latent skill at creating "categorykiller" brands-brands where the name of the product is synonymous with the name of the category (e.g., Kleenex)in paper-based products.
Kroger: Could become the best at innovative supercombo stores.
Notes: Kroger always had a strength in grocery store innovation.
Nucor: Could become the best at harnessing culture Notes: Nucor came to see that it had tremendous skill in two activities: and technology to produce low-cost steel.
Philip Morris: Could become the best in the world at building brand loyalty in cigarettes and, later, other consumables.
Notes: Early in transition, Philip Morris saw that it could become simply the best tobacco company in the world.
Good to Great Pitney Bowes: Could become the best in the world at messaging that requires sophisticated backoffice equipment.
Walgreens: Could become Notes: Walgreens saw that it was not just a drugstore but also a convenience store.
It also made extensive investments in technology (including recent Web site developments), linking Walgreen stores worldwide to create one giant "corner pharmacy."
Wells Fargo: Could become the best at running a bank like a business, with a focus on the western United States.
The banking industry ranked in the bottom quartile of industries (in total retirns) during the same period that Wells Fargo beat the market by four times.
Even more impressive, both Pitney Bowes and Nucor were in bottom 5 percent industries; yet both these companies beat the market by well over five times.
Recall how Walgreens switched its focus from profit per store to profit per customer visit.
Convenient locations are expensive, but by increasing profit per customer visit, Walgreens was able to increase convenience (nine stores in a mile!)
Or consider Wells Fargo.
Following this logic, Wells Fargo became one of the first banks to change its distribution system to rely primarily on stripped-down branches and ATMs.
The key is to use the question of the denominator to gain understand~ng and insight into your economic model.
For example, Fannie Mae grasped the subtle denominator of profit per mortgage risk level, not per mortgage (which would be the "obvious" choice).
The real driver in Fannie Mae's economics is the ability to understand risk of default in a package of mortgages better than anyone else.
Nucor, for example, made its mark in the ferociously price competitive steel industry with the denominator profit per ton of finished steel.
But the Nucor people understood that the driving force in its economic engine was a combination of a strong-work-ethic culture and the application of advanced manufacturing technology.
As the denominator question emerged from the research, we tested the question on a number of executive teams.
Circuit City: per geographic region Key insight: Shift from profit per single store to profit per region reflected local economies of scale.
While per-store performance remained vital, regional grouping was a key insight that drove Circuit City's economics beyond Silo's.
Fannie Mae: per mortgage risk level Key insight: Shift from profit per mortgage to profit per mortgage risk level reflected the fundamental insight that managing interest risk reduces dependence on the direction of interest rates.
Gillette: per customer Key insight: Shift from profit per division to profit per customer reflected the economic power of repeatable purchases (e.g., razor cartridges) times high profit per purchase (e.g., Mach3, not disposable Kimberly-Clark: per Key insight: Shift from profit per fixed asset (the mills) to profit per consumer brand; would be less cyclical and more profitable in good times and bad.
consumer brand Good to Great Kroger: per local population Key insight: Shift from profit per store to profit per local population reflected the insight that local market share drove grocery economics.
Nucor: per ton of finished steel Key insight: Shift from profit per division to profit per ton of finished steel reflected Nucor's unique blend of highproductivity culture mixed with minimill technology, rather than just focusing on volume.
brand category sales region to profit per global brand category reflected the understanding that the real key to greatness lay in brands that could have global power, Pitney Bowes: per customer Key insight: Shift from profit per postage meter to profit per customer reflected the idea that Pitney Bowes could use its postage meters as a jumping-off point to bring a range of sophisticated products into the back offices of customers.
Walgreens: per Key insight: Shift from profit per customer visit store to profit per customer visit reflected a symbiotic relationship between convenient (and expensive) store sites and sus- per loan to profit per employee reflected understanding of the brutal fact of deregulation: Banking is a commodity.
Hasbro built its upswing on the insight that a portfolio of classic toys and games, such as G.I.
Joe and Monopoly, produces more sustainable cash flow than big onetime hits.23In fact, Hasbro is the one comparison company that understood all three circles of the Hedgehog Concept.
Systematically building from all three circles, Hasbro became the best-performing comparison in our study, lending further credence to the power of the Hedgehog Concept.
Hasbro became an unsustained transition in part because it lost the discipline to stay within the three circles, after the unexpected death of CEO Stephen Hassenfeld.
The Hasbro case reinforces a vital lesson.
UNDERSTANDING YOUR PASSION When interviewing the Philip Morris executives, we encountered an intensity and passion that surprised us.
Even with a most sinful collection of consumer products (Marlboro cigarettes, Miller beer, 67 percent fat-filled Velveeta, Maxwell House coffee for caffeine addicts, Toblerone for chocoholics, and so forth), we found tremendous passion for the business.
Most of the top executives at Philip Morris were passionate consumers of their own products.
In 1979, Ross Millhiser, then vice chairman of Philip Morris and a dedicated smoker, said, "I love cigarettes.
"24 The Philip Morris people clearly loved their company and had passion for what they were doing.
It's as if they viewed themselves as the lone, fiercely independent cowboy depicted in the Marlboro billboards.
A board member told me during my research for a previous project, "I really love being on Good to Great 10s the board of Philip Morris.
Yet, unlike Philip Morris, R. J. Reynolds executives began to diversify away from tobacco into any arena where it could get growth, regardless of whether they had passion for those acquisitions or whether the company could be the best in the world at them.
The Philip Morris people stuck much closer to the tobacco business, in large part because they loved that business.
Reynolds executives eventually lost passion for anything except making themselves rich through a leveraged buyout.26 ' It may seem odd to talk about something as soft and fuzzy as "passion" as an integral part of a strategic framework.
But throughout the good-togreat companies, passion became a key part of the Hedgehog Concept.
You can only discover what ignites your passion and the passions of those around you.
When Gillette executives made the choice to build sophisticated, relatively expensive shaving systems rather than fight a low-margin battle with disposables, they did so in large part because they just couldn't get excited about cheap disposable razors.
"Zeien talks about shaving systems with the sort of technical gusto one expects from a Boeing or Hughes engineer," wrote one journalist about Gillette's CEO in 1996.28Gillette has always been at its best when it sticks to businesses that fit its Hedgehog Jim Collins Concept.
"People who aren't passionate about Gillette need not apply," wrote a Wall Street Journal reporter, who went on to describe how a top business school graduate wasn't hired because she didn't show enough passion for deodorant.29 Perhaps you, too, can't get passionate about deodorant.
You might wonder about what type of person gets all jazzed up about making a bank as efficient as McDonald's, or who considers a diaper charismatic.
For example, the Fannie Mae people were not passionate about the mechanical process of packaging mortgages into market securities.
Linda Knight, who joined Fannie Mae in 1983, just as the company faced its darkest days, told us: "This wasn't just any old company getting into trouble; this was a company at the core of making home ownership a reality for thousands of Americans.
"30As another Fannie Mae executive summed up, "I see us as a key mechanism for strengthening the whole social fabric of America.
Then, with the Hedgehog Concept, you break into a clearing, G o o d t o Great the fog lifts, and you can see for miles.
What's so striking about the comparison companies is that-for all their change programs, frantic gesticulations, and charismatic leaders-they rarely emerged from the fog.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the comparison companies' mindless pursuit of growth: Over two thirds of the comparison companies displayed an obsession with growth without the benefit of a Hedgehog Concept.31Statements such as "We've been a growth at any price company" and "Betting that size equals success ' pepper the materials on the comparison companies.
Consider the case of Great Western and Fannie Mae.
"34 Quite a contrast to Fannie Mae, which had a simple, crystalline understanding that it could be the best capital markets player in anything i lim Collins related to mortgages, better even than Goldman Sachs or Salomon Brothers in opening up the full capital markets to the mortgage process.
It built a powerful economic machine by reframing its business model on risk management, rather than mortgage selling.
And it drove the machine with great passion, the Fannie Mae people inspired by its vital role in democratizing home ownership.
Then in 1984, one year after it clarified its Hedgehog Concept, Fannie Mae exploded upward, while Great Western kept lollygagging along until just before its acquisition in 1997.
By focusing on its simple, elegant conception-and not just focusing on "growth"-Fannie Mae grew revenues nearly threefold from its transition year in 1984 through 1996.
T h e Hedgehog Concept is a turning point in the journey from good to great.
In most cases, the transition date follows within a few years of the Hedgehog Concept.
Furthermore, everything from here on out in the book hinges upon having the Hedgehog Concept.
As will become abundantly clear in the following chapters, disciplined action- the third big chunk in the framework after disciplined people and disciplined thought- only makes sense in the context of the Hedgehog Concept.
Despite its vital importance (or, rather, because of its vital importance), it would be a terrible mistake to thoughtlessly attempt to jump right to a Hedgehog Concept.
FANNIE MAE, GREAT WESTERN, AND THE GENERAL MARKET Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, 1984 - 2000 Fannie Mae: $64.17 General Market $11 53 / Notes: 1.
Fannie Mae transition point occurred in 1984.
It took Einstein ten years of groping through the fog to get the theory of special relativity, and he was a bright guy.35 It took about four years on average for the good-to-great companies to clarify their Hedgehog Concepts.
Like scientific insight, a Hedgehog Concept simplifies a complex world and makes decisions much easier.
Recognize that getting a Hedgehog Concept is an inherently iterative process, not an event.
The essence of the process is to get the right people engaged in vigorous dialogue and debate, infused with the brutal facts and guided by questions formed by the three circles.
In response to the question, "How should we go about getting our Hedgehog Concept?"
I' would point to the diagram on page 114 and say: "Build the Council, and use that as a model.
When asked, "How do we accelerate the process of getting a Hedgehog Concept?"
If you go through this cycle enough times, guided resolutely by the three circles, you will eventually gain the depth of understanding required for a Hedgehog Concept.
lim Collins Does every organization have a Hedgehog Concept to discover?
Infused with the Stockdale Paradox ("There must be something we can become the best at, and we will find it!
We must also confront the brutal facts of what we cannot be the best at, and we will not delude ourselves!
"), every good-to-great company, no matter how awful at the start of the process, prevailed in its search for a Hedgehog Concept.
As you search for your own concept, keep in mind that when the goodto-great companies finally grasped their Hedgehog Concept, it had none of the tiresome, irritating blasts of mindless bravado typical of the comparison companies.
When you get your Hedgehog Concept right, it has the quiet ping of truth, like a single, clear, perfectly struck note hanging in the air in the hushed silence of a full auditorium at the end of a quiet movement of a Mozart piano concerto.
The goal to win the Ironman flowed from early understanding of her Hedgehog Concept.
F R A N K L , Man's Search for Meaning 1 In 1980, George Rathmann cofounded the biotechnology company Amgen.
Over the next twenty years, Amgen grew from a struggling entrepreneurial enterprise into a $3.2 billion company with 6,400 employees, creating blood products to improve the lives of people suffering through chemotherapy and kidney dialysis.2 Under Rathmann, Amgen became one of the few biotechnology companies that delivered consistent profitability and growth.
An investor who bought as little as $7,000 ofAmgen stock would have realized a capital gain of over $1 million, thirteen times better than the same investment in the general stock market.
Few successful start-ups become great companies, in large part because Good to Great I I I they respond to growth and success in the wrong way.
The company begins to hire MBAs and seasoned executives from blue-chip companies.
Reporting relationships become clear, and an executive class with special perks begins to appear.
The creative magic begins to wane as some of the most innovative people leave, disgusted by the burgeoning bureaucracy and hierarchy.
He understood that the purpose of bureaucracy is to compensate for incompetence and lack of discipline-a problem that largely goes away if you have the right people in the first place.
Most companies build their bureaucratic rules to manage the small percentage of wrong people on the bus, which in turn drives away the right people on the bus, which then increases the percentage of wrong people on the bus, which increases the need for more bureaucracy to compensate for incompetence and lack of discipline, which then further drives the right people away, and so forth.
Rathmann also understood an alternative exists: Avoid bureaucracy and hierarchy and instead create a culture of discipline.
When you put these two complementary forces together-a culture of discipline with an ethic Jim Collins of entrepreneurship-you get a magical alchemy of superior performance and sustained results.
The Good-to-Great Matrix of Creative Discipline High Great Organization Hierarchical Organization Culture of Discipline Bureaucratic Organization Start-up Organization Low Low Ethic of Entrepreneurship High Why start this chapter with a biotechnology entrepreneur rather than one of our good-to-great companies?
Because Rathmann credits much of his entrepreneurial success to what he learned while working at Abbott Laboratories before founding Amgen: What I got from Abbott was the idea that when you set your objectives for the year, you record them in concrete.
You can change your plans through the year, but you never change what you measure yourself against.
That was a discipline learned at Abbott, and that we carried into Amgen.j Good to Great \ I Many of the Abbott disciplines trace back to 1968, when it hired a remarkable financial officer named Bernard H. Semler.
Rather, he set out to invent mechanisms that would drive cultural change.
He created a whole new framework of accounting that he called Responsibility Accounting, wherein every item of cost, income, and investment would be clearly identified with a single individual responsible for that item.4 The idea, radical for the 1960s, was to create a system wherein every Abbott manager in every type of job was responsible for his or her return on investment, with the same rigor that an investor holds an entrepreneur responsible.
There would be no hiding behind traditional accounting allocations, no slopping funds about to cover up ineffective management, no opportunities for finger-pointing.5 But the beauty of the Abbott system lay not just in its rigor, but in how it used rigor and discipline- to enable creativity and entrepreneurship.
"Abbott developed a very disciplined organization, but not in a linear way of thinking," said George Rathmann.
"[It] was exemplary at having both financial discipline and the divergent thinking of creative work.
We used financial discipline as a way to provide resources for the really creative work.
But ) ~ Abbott also had the discipline to say no to opportunities that failed the three circles test.
While encouraging wide-ranging innovation within its divisions, Abbott simultaneously maintained fanatical adherence to its Hedgehog Concept of contributing to cost-effective health care.
Abbott Laboratories exemplifies a key finding of our study: a culture of discipline.
The main points of this chapter, however, boil down to one central idea: Build a culture h l l of I I lim Collins I I people who take disciplined action within the three circles, fanatically consistent with the Hedgehog Concept.
Fill that culture with self-disciplined people who are willing to go to extreme lengths to fulfill their responsibilities.
Don't confuse a culture of discipline with a tyrannical disciplinarian.
Adhere with great consistency to the Hedgehog Concept, exercising an almost religious focus on the intersection of the three circles.
Equall y important, create a "stop doing list" and systematically unplug anything extraneous.
Now take a step back and think about the model here.
The point of this analogy is that when we looked inside the good-to-great companies, we were reminded of the best part of the airline pilot model: freedom and responsibility within the framework of a highly developed system.
Jim Collins "This was the secret to how we were able to run stores from a great distance, by remote control," said Bill Rivas of Circuit City.
"9 In a sense, Circuit City became to consumer electronics retailing what McDonald's became to restaurants-not the most exquisite experience, but an enormously consistent one.
The system evolved over time as Circuit City experimented by adding new items like computers and video players (just like McDonald's added breakfast Egg McMuffins).
"'^ Therein lies one of the key reasons why Circuit City took off in the early 1980s and beat the general stock market by more than eighteen times over the next fifteen years.
In a sense, much of this book is about creating a culture of discipline.
It all starts with disciplined people.
T h e transition begins not by trying to discipline the wrong people into the right behaviors, but by getting selfdisciplined people on the bus in the first place.
Next we have disciplined thought.
You need the discipline to confront the brutal facts of reality, while retaining resolute faith that you can and will create a path to greatness.
Most importantly, you need the discipline to persist in the search for understanding until you get your Hedgehog Concept.
Finally, we have disciplined action, the primary subject of this chapter.
The comparison companies often tried to jump right to disciplined action.
But disciplined action without self-disciplined people is impossible to sustain, and disciplined action without disciplined thought is a recipe for disaster.
Indeed, discipline by itself will not produce great results.
We find plenty of organizations in history that had tremendous discipline and that marched right into disaster, with precision and in nicely formed lines.
No, the point is to first get self-disciplined people who engage in very rigorous thinking, who then take disciplined action within the framework of a consistent system designed around the Hedgehog Concept.
Good to Great DISCIPLINED DISCIPLINED DISCIPLINED People Thought Action R I N S I N G YOUR COTTAGE CHEESE Throughout our research, we were struck by the continual use of words like disciplined, rigorous, dogged, determined, diligent, precise, fastidious, systematic, methodical, workmanlike, demanding, consistent, focused, accountable, and responsible.
The analogy comes from a disciplined world-class athlete named Dave Scott, who won the Hawaii Ironman Triathlon six times.
T h e point is that rinsing his cottage cheese was simply one more small step that he believed would make him just that much better, one more small step added to all the other small steps to create a consistent program of superdiscipline.
Much of the answer to the question of "good to great" lies in the discipline to do whatever it takes to become the best within carefully selected arenas and then to seek continual improvement from there.
Consider Wells Fargo in contrast to Bank of America.
Carl Reichardt never doubted that Wells Fargo could emerge from bank deregulation as a stronger company, not a weaker one.
We will start by rinsing our own cottage cheese, right here in the executive suite.
He froze executive salaries for two years (despite the fact that Wells Fargo was enjoying some of the most profitable years in its history).12He shut the executive dining room and replaced it with a college dorm food-service caterer.13He closed the executive elevator, sold the corporate jets, and banned green plants from the executive suite as too expensive to water.14 He removed free coffee from the executive suite.
"16 Reichardt would sit through meetings with fellow executives, in a beat-up old chair with the stuffing hanging out.
"17 Across the street at Bank of America, executives also faced deregulation and recognized the need to eliminate waste.
However, unlike Wells Fargo, Good to Great 12s B of A executives didn't have the discipline to rinse their own cottage cheese.
They preserved their posh executive kingdom in its imposing tower in downtown Sam Francisco, the CEO's office described in the book Breaking the Bank as "a northeast corner suite with a large attached conference room, oriental rugs, and floor-to-ceiling windows that offered a sweeping panorama of the San Francisco Bay from the Golden Gate to the Bay Bridge.
"18 (We found no evidence of executive chairs with the stuffing hanging out.)
The elevator made its last stop at the executive floor and descended all the way to the ground in one quiet whoosh, unfettered by the intrusions of lesser beings.
The vast open space in the executive suite made the windows look even taller than they actually were, creating a sense of floating above the fog in an elevated city of alien elites who ruled the world from above.19Why rinse our cottage cheese when life is so good?
After losing $1.8 billion across three years in the mid-1980s, B of A eventually made the necessary changes in response to deregulation (largely by hiring ex-Wells executive^).^^ But even in the darkest days, B ofA could not bring itself to get rid of the perks that shielded its executives from the real world.
O n the one hand, the good-to-great companies became more disciplined than the direct comparison companies, as with Wells Fargo in contrast to Bank of America.
O n the other hand, the unsustained comparisons showed themselves to be just as disciplined as the good-to-great companies, "Based on my analysis, I don't think we can put discipline in the book as a finding," said Eric Hagen, after he completed a special analysis unit looking at the leadership cultures across the companies.
"It is absolutely clear that the unsustained comparison CEOs brought tremendous discipline to their companies, and that is why they got such great initial results.
So, discipline just doesn't pass muster as a distinguishing variable."
As we further examined the evidence, it became clear that-despite surface appearances-there was indeed a huge difference between the two sets of companies in their approach to discipline.
I I I I lim Collins Consider Ray MacDonald, who took command of Burroughs in 1964.
Every dollar invested in 1964, the year he became president, and taken out at the end of 1977, when he retired, produced returns 6.6 times better than the general market.23However, the company had no culture of discipline to endure beyond him.
After he retired, his helper minions were frozen by indecision, leaving the company, according to Business Week, "with an inability to do anything.
"24 Burroughs then began a long slide, with cumulative returns falling 93 percent below the market from the end of the MacDonald era to 2000.
We found a similar story at Rubbermaid under Stanley Gault.
Gault brought strict disciplines to Rubbermaid-rigorous planning and competitor analysis, systematic market research, profit analysis, hard-nosed cost control, and so on.
"This is an incredibly disciplined organization," wrote one analyst.
"There is an incredible thoroughness in Rubbermaid's approach to life.
Walking down the street in Manhattan, he noticed a doorman muttering and swearing as he swept dirt into a Rubbermaid dustpan.
"Stan whirled around and starting grilling the man on why he was unhappy," said Richard Gates, who told the story to Fortune.
"27 Rubbermaid rose dramatically under the tyranny of this singularly disciplined leader but then just as dramatically declined when he departed.
Under Gault, Rubbermaid beat the market 3.6 to 1.
After Gault, Rubbermaid lost 59 percent of its value relative to the market, before being bought out by Newell.
One particularly fascinating example of the disciplinarian syndrome was Chrysler under Lee Iacocca, whom Business Week described simply as, "The Man.
"28 Iacocca became president of Chrysler in 1979 and imposed his towering personality to discipline the organization into shape.
"Right away I knew the place was in a state of anarchy [and] needed a dose of order and discipline-and quick," wrote Iacocca of his early days.29In his first year, he entirely overhauled the management structure, instituted strict financial controls, improved quality control measures, rationalized the production schedule, and conducted mass layoffs to preserve cash.30"I felt like an Army Surgeon.
I'll declare bankru cy -in the morning, and you'll all be out of Iacocca produ ed spectacular results and Chrysler became one of the most celebrated turnarounds in industrial history.
Critics contend it all distracted him, and was a root cause of Chrysler's current problems.
Distracting or not, it's clear that being a folk hero is a demanding ~ide1ine.l'~~ Worse than his moonlight career as a national hero, his lack of discipline to stay within the arenas in which Chrysler could be the best in the world led to a binge of highly undisciplined diversifications.
Whereas most CEOs would be content with a single Gulfstream jet, Iacocca decided to buy the whole Gulfstream company!34Also in the mid-1980s, he embarked on a costly and ultimately unsuccessful joint venture with Italian sports car maker Maserati.
"Iacocca had a soft spot for Italians," said one retired Chrysler executive.
"Iacocca, who owns a modest estate in Tuscany, was so intent on an Italian alliance that commercial realities were ignored, suggest industry insiders," wrote Business Wee .35Some estimates put the loss of the failed Maserati venture at $200 illion, which, according to Forbes, was "an enormous sum to lose on a igh-price, low-volume roadster.
During the second half of Iacocca's tenure, the company slid / Good to Great 31 percent behind the market and faced another potential bankruptcy.37 "Like so many patients with a heart condition," wrote a Chrysler executive, "we'd survived surgery several years before only to revert to our unhealthy l i f e ~ t y l e . "
~ ~ rThe above cases illustrate a pattern we found in every unsustained comparison: a spectacular rise under a tyrannical disciplinarian, followed by an equally spectacular decline when the disciplinarian stepped away, leaving behind no enduring culture of discipline, or when the disciplinarian himself became undisciplined and strayed wantonly outside the three circles.
Yes, discipline is essential for great results, but disciplined action without disciplined understanding of the three circles cannot produce sustained great results.
FANATICAL ADHERENCE TO THE HEDGEHOG CONCEPT For nearly forty years, Pitney Bowes lived inside the warm and protective cocoon of a monopoly.
Postal Service and its patents on postage meter machines, Pitney attained 100 percent of the metered mail market.39By the end of the 1950s, nearly half of all U.S. mail passed through Pitney Bowes machines.40With gross profit margins in excess of 80 percent, no competition, a huge market, and a recession-proof business, Pitney Bowes wasn't so much a great company as it was a company with a great monopoly.
Then, as almost always happens to monopolies when the protective cocoon is ripped away, Pitney Bowes began a long slide.
First came a consent decree that required Pitney Bowes to license its patents to competitors, royalty free.41Within six years, Pitney Bowes had sixteen corn petit or^.^^ Pitney fell into a reactionary "Chicken Littlelthe sky is falling" diversification frenzy, throwing cash after ill-fated acquisitions and joint ventures, including a $70 mi lion bloodbath (54 percent of net stockholders' equity at the time) from a computer retail foray.
Allen and his successor, George Harvey, instituted a model of disciplined diversification.
For example, Pitney eventually attained 45 percent of the high-end fax market for large companies, a hugely profitable cash machine.43 Harvey began a systematic process of investment in new technologies and products, such as the Paragon mail processor that seals and sends letters, and by the late 1980s, Pitney consistently derived over half its revenues from products introduced in the previous three years.44 Later, Pitney Bowes became a pioneer at linking backroom machines to the Internet, yet another opportunity for disciplined diversification.
After falling 77 percent behind the market from the consent decree to its darkest days in 1973, Pitney Bowes reversed course, eventually rising to over eleven times the market by the start of 1999.
From 1973 to 2000, Pitney Bowes outperformed Coca-Cola, 3M, Johnson & Johnson, Merck, Motorola, Procter & Gamble, Hewlett-Packard, Walt Disney, and even General Electric.
Xerox didn't.
Pitney Bowes illustrates what can happen when a company lacks the discipline to stay within the three circles and, conversely, what can happen when it regains that discipline.
In contrast, we found a lack of discipline to stay within the three circles as a key factor in the demise of nearly all the comparison companies.
Every comparison either (1) lacked the discipline to understand its three circles or (2) lacked the discipline to stay within the three circles.
Of course, all tobacco companies began to diversify at that time for the same reason, including Philip Morris.
R. J. Reynolds spent nearly a third of total corporate assets in 1970 to buy a shipping container company and an oil company (Sea-Land and Aminoil), the idea being to make money by shipping its own oil.46Okay, not a terrible idea on its own.
But what on earth did it have to do with R. J. Reynolds' Hedgehog Concept?
It was a wholly undisciplined acquisition that came about in part because Sea-Land's founder was a close friend of R. J. Reynolds' chairman.47 After pouring more than $2 billion into Sea-Land, the total investment nearly equaled the entire amount of net stockholders' equity.48 Finally, after years of starving the tobacco business to funnel funds into the sinking ship business, RJR acknowledged failure and sold S e a - L a n ~ lOne .~~ Reynolds grandson complained: "Look, these guys are the world's best at making and selling tobacco products, but what do they know about ships or oil?
"50 To be fair, Philip Morris did not have a perfect diversification record either, as evidenced by its failed purchase of 7UP.
However, in stark contrast to R. J. Reynolds, Philip Morris displayed greater discipline in response to the 1964 surgeon general's report.
Instead of abandoning its Hedgehog Concept, Philip Morris redefined its Hedgehog Concept in terms of building global brands in not-so-healthy consumables (tob cco, beer, soft drinks, coffee, chocolate, processed cheese, etc.).
Philip M o is' superior discipline to stay within the three circles is one key reason wh the results of the two companies diverged so dramatically after the 1964 report, despite the fact that they both faced the exact same industry opportunities and threats.
From 1964 to 1989 (when R. J. Reynolds disappeared from public trading in a leveraged buyout), $1 invested in Philip Morris beat $1 invested in R. J. Reynolds by over four times.
Few companies have the discipline to discover their Hedgehog Concept, much less the discipline to build consistently within it.
They fail to grasp a simple paradox: The more an organization has the discipline to lni , Jim Collins stay within its three circles, the more it will have attractive opportunities for growth.
This notion of fanatical consistency relative to the Hedgehog Concept doesn't just concern the portfolio of strategic activities.
Nucor built its success around the Hedgehog Concept of harnessing culture and technology to produce steel.
Central to the Nucor concept was the idea of aligning worker interests with management and shareholder interests through an egalitarian meritocracy largely devoid of class distinctions.
~ ' When we interviewed Ken Iverson, he told us that nearly 100 percent of the success of Nucor was due to its ability to translate its simple concept into disciplined action consistent with that concept.
It grew into a $3.5 billion Fortune 500 company with only four layers of management and a corporate headquarters staff of fewer than twenty-five people-executive, financial, secretarial, the whole shebang-crammed into a rented office the size of a small dental practice.52Cheap veneer furniture adorned the Good to Great distinctions and creating an egalitarian meritocracy that aligns management, labor, and financial interests Could become the best in the world at harnessing culture denominator of Nucor's THREE CIRCLES 1970-1 995 lobby, which itself was not much larger than a closet.
Instead of a corporate dining room, executives hosted visiting dignitaries at Phil's Diner, a strip mall sandwich shop across the street.53 Executives did not receive better benefits than frontline workers.
In fact, executives had fewer perks.
For example, all workers (but not executives) were eligible to receive $2,000 per year for each child for up to four years of post-high school e d u c a t i ~ n In .
"55 When Nucor had a highly profitable year, everyone in the company would have a very profitable year.
Nucor workers became so well paid that one woman told her husband, "If you get fired from Nucor, 1'11 divorce But when Nucor faced difficult times, everyone from top to bottom suffered.
Jim Collins Nucor took extraordinary steps to keep at bay the class distinctions that eventually encroach on most organizations.
All 7,000 employees' names appeared in the annual report, not just officers' and executive^'.^^ Everyone except safety supervisors and visitors wore the same color hard hats.
Nucor responded by organizing a series of forums to address the point that your status and authority in Nucor come from your leadership capabilities, not your position.
If you don't like it-if you really feel you need that class distinction-well, then, Nucor is just not the right place for you.59 In contrast to Nucor's dental suite-sized headquarters, Bethlehem Steel built a twenty-one-story office complex to house its executive staff.
[had to have] windows in two directions, so it was out of that desire that we came up with the design," explained a Bethlehem executive.60 In his book Crisis in Bethlehem, John Strohmeyer details a culture as far to the other end of the continuum from Nucor as you can imagine.
He describes a fleet of corporate aircraft, used even for taking executives' children to college and flitting away to weekend hideaways.
He describes a world-class eighteen-hole executive golf course, an executive country club renovated with Bethlehem corporate funds, and even how executive rank determined shower priority at the club.61 We came to the conclusion that Bethlehem executives saw the very purpose of their activities as the perpetuation of a class system that elevated them to elite status.
Bethlehem did not decline in the 1970s and 1980s primarily because of imp rts or technology- Bethlehem declined first and foremost because i was a culture wherein people focused their efforts on negotiating th nuances of an intricate social hierarchy, not on customers, competit\, rs, or changes in the external world.
From 1966 (at the start of its buildup) to 1999, Nucor posted thirty-four consecutive years of positive profitability, while over those same thirty-four years, Bethlehem lost money twelve times and its cumulative profitability added up to less than zero.
By the 1990s, Nucor's profitability beat Bethlehem's every single year, and at the end of the century, Nucor-which Good to Great had been less than a third the size of Bethlehem only a decade earlierfinally surpassed Bethlehem in total revenues.62Even more astounding, Nucor's average five-year profit per employee exceeded Bethlehem by almost ten times.63And for the investor, $1 invested in Nucor beat $1 invested in Bethlehem Steel by over 200 times.
To be fair, Bethlehem had one giant problem not faced by Nucor: adversarial labor relations and entrenched unions.
Nucor had no union and enjoyed remarkably good relations with its workers.
In fact, when union organizers visited one plant, workers felt so ferociously loyal to Nucor that management had to protect the union organizers from workers who began shouting and throwing sand at them.64 But the union argument begs a crucial question: Why did Nucor have such a better relationship with its workers in the first place?
Because Ken Iverson and his team had a simple, crystalline Hedgehog Concept about aligning worker interests with management interests and-most importantly-because they were willing to go to almost extreme lengths to build the entire enterprise consistent with that concept.
Call them a bit fanatical if you want, but to create great results requires a nearly fanatical dedication to the idea of consistency within the Hedgehog Concept.
Most of us lead busy but undisciplined lives.
They displayed a remarkable discipline to unplug all sorts of extraneous junk.
When Darwin Smith became C E O of Kimberly-Clark, he made great use of "stop doing" lists.
"65He saw "title creep" as a sign of class-consciousness and bureaucratic layering, so he simply unplugged titles.
To reinforce the idea that Kimberly-Clark should begin thinking of itself as a consumer company, not a paper company, he unplugged Kimberly from all paper industry trade association^.^^ The good-to-great companies institutionalized the discipline of "stop d o i n g through the use of a unique budget mechanism.
Stop and think for a moment: What is the purpose of budgeting?
Most answer that budgeting exists to decide how much to apportion to each activity, or to manage costs, or both.
Kimberly-Clark didn't just reallocate resources from the paper business to the consumer business.
I had an interesting conversation with some executives from a company in the paper business.
It's a good company, not yet a great one, and they had competed directly with Kimberly-Clark before Kimberly transformed itself into a consumer company.
Out of curiosity, I asked them what they thought of Kimberly-Clark.
Recall Kroger's commitment to overturn its entire system to create superstores, while A&P clung to the "safety" of its older stores.
Recall Abbott's commitment to put the bulk of its resources into becoming number one in diagnostics and hospital nutritionals, while Upjohn clung to its core pharmaceutical business (where it could never be the best in the world).
Recall how Walgreens exited the profitable food-service business and focused all its might into one idea: the best, most convenient drugstores.
Recall Gillette and Sensor, Nucor and the mini-mills, KimberlyClark and selling the mills to channel all its resources into the consumer business.
They all had the guts to make huge investments, once they understood their Hedgehog Concept.
"Being right" means getting the Hedgehog Concept; "highly undiversified ' means investing fully in those things that fit squarely within the three circles and getting rid of everything else.
If you have Level 5 leaders who get the right people on the bus, if you confront the brutal facts of reality, if you create a climate where the truth is heard, if you have a Council and work within the three circles, if you frame all decisions in the context of a crystalline Hedgehog Concept, if you act from understanding, not bravado-if you do all these things, then you are likely to be right on the big decisions.
The real question is, once you know the right thing, do you have the discipline to do the right thing and, equally important, to stop doing the wrong things?
Good to Great , I n July 28, 1999, drugstore.com-one of the first Internet pharmacies-sold shares of its stock to the public.
"New technology will change everything," the logic went.
"The Internet is going to completely revolutionize all businesses," the gurus chanted.
"It's the great Internet landgrab: Be there first, be there fast, build market share-no matter how expensive-and you win," yelled the entrepreneurs.
Just tell people you were doing something, anything, connected to the Internet, and-presto!-you became rich by flipping shares to the public, even if you had no profits (or even a real company).
Why take all the hard steps to go from buildup to breakthrough, creating a model that actually works, when you could yell, "New technology!"
The entrepreneur admitted to the Industry Standard that it seemed strange to go public before starting a business, but that didn't stop him from trying to persuade investors to buy 1.1 million shares at $7 to $9 per share, despite having no revenues, no employees, no customers, no company.j With the new technology of the Internet, who needs all those archaic relics of the old economy?
At the high point of this frenzy, drugstore.com issued its challenge to Walgreens.
At first, Walgreens' stock suffered from the invasion of the dotcoms, losing over 40 percent of its price in the months leading up to the drugstore.com public offering.
Wrote Forbes in October 1999: "Investors seem to think that the Web race will be won by competitors who hit the ground running- companies like drugstore.com, which trades at 398 times revenue, rather than Walgreen, trading at 1.4 times revenue.04 Analysts downgraded Walgreens' stock, and the pressure on Walgreens to react to the Internet threat increased as nearly $1 5 billion in market value evaporated5 Walgreens' response in the midst of this frenzy?
"We're a crawl, walk, run company," Dan Jorndt told Forbes in describing his deliberate, methodical approach to the Internet.
Instead of reacting like Chicken Little, Walgreens executives did something quite unusual for the times.
Slow at first (crawl), Walgreens began experimenting with a Web site while engaging in intense internal dialogue and debate about its implications, within the context of its own peculiar Hedgehog Concept.
"How will the Internet connect to our convenience concept?
Throughout, Walgreens executives embraced the Stockdale Paradox: "We have complete faith that we can prevail in an Internet world as a great company; yet, we must also confront the brutal facts of reality about the Internet."
One Walgreens executive told us a fun little story about this remarkable moment in history.
An Internet leader made a statement about Walgreens along the lines of, "Oh, Walgreens.
They're too old and stodgy for the Internet world.
The Walgreens people, while irked by this arrogant comment from the Internet elite, never seriously considered a public response.
Said one executive, "Let's quietly go about doing what we need to do, and it'll become clear soon enough that they just pulled the tail of the wrong dog."
Then a little faster (walk), Walgreens began to find ways to tie the Internet directly to its sophisticated inventory-and-distribution model andultimately-its convenience concept.
Fill your prescription on-line, pop into your car and go to your local Walgreens drive-through (in whatever city you happen to be in at the moment), zoom past the window with hardly a moment's pause picking up your bottle of whatever.
), Walgreens bet big, launching an Internet site as sophisticated and well designed as most pure dot-coms.
Just before writing this chapter, in October 2000, we went on-line to use Walgreens.com.
Precisely one year after the Forbes article, Walgreens had figured out how to harness the Internet to accelerate momentum, making it just that much more unstoppable.
From its low point in 1999 at the depths of the dot-com scare, Walgreens' stock price nearly doubled within a year.
It had lost nearly all of its initial value.6 While Walgreens went from crawl to walk to run, drugstore.com went from run to walk to crawl.
G o o d t o Great Perhaps drugstore.com will figure out a sustainable model that works and become a great company.
But it will not become great because of snazzy technology, hype, and an irrational stock market.
It will only become a great company if it figures out how to apply technology to a coherent concept that reflects understanding of the three circles.
TECHNOLOGY AND THE HEDGEHOG CONCEPT Now, you might be thinking: "But the Internet frenzy is just a speculative bubble that burst.
To be clear: The point of this chapter has little to do with the specifics of the Internet bubble, per se.
It happened with the Internet.
Yet through all of this change, great companies have adapted and endured.
Indeed, most of the truly great companies of the last hundred years-from Wal-Mart to Walgreens, from Procter & Gamble to KimberlyClark, from Merck to Abbott-trace their roots back through multiple generations of technology change, be it electricity, the television, or the Internet.
We could have predicted that Walgreens would eventually figure out the Internet.
The company had a history of making huge investments in technology long before other companies in its industry became tech s a y .
The idea was simple: By linking all Walgreens stores electronically and sending customer data to a central source, it turned every Wal- Jim Collins greens outlet in the country into a customer's local pharmacy.
No problem, the Phoenix store is linked to the central system, and it's just like going down to your hometown Walgreens store.
But when Walgreens made the investment in Intercom in the late 1970s, no one else in the industry had anything like it.
Eventually, Walgreens invested over $400 million in Intercom, including $100 million for its own satellite system.7 Touring the Intercom headquarters-dubbed "Earth Station Wa1green""is like taking a trip through a NASA space center with its stunning array of sophisticated electronic gadgetry," wrote a trade j o ~ r n a l Walgreens' .~ technical staff became skilled at maintaining every piece of technology, rather than relying on outside ~ ~ e c i a l i s tIts .didn't ~ stop there.
Walgreens pioneered the application of scanners, robotics, computerized inventory control, and advanced warehouse tracking systems.
The Internet is just one more step in a continuous pattern.
Walgreens didn't adopt all of this advanced technology just for the sake of advanced technology or in fearful reaction to falling behind.
No, it used technology as a tool to accelerate momentum after hitting breakthrough, and tied technology directly to its Hedgehog Concept of convenient drugstores increasing profit per customer visit.
As an interesting aside, as technology became increasingly sophisticated in the late 1990s, Walgreens' CIO (chief information officer) was a registered pharmacist by training, not a technology guru.1 Walgreens remained resolutely clear: Its Hedgehog Concept would drive its use of technology, not the other way around.
The Walgreens case reflects a general pattern.
However, it was never technology per se, but the pioneering application of carefully selected technologies.
Every good-to-great company became a pioneer in the application of technology, but the technologies themselves varied greatly.
Kroger, for example, was an early pioneer in the application of bar code scanners, which helped it accelerate past A&P by linking frontline purchases to backroom inventory management.
Now recall how Kroger systematically shed its dreary old and small grocery stores, replacing them with nice, big, shiny superstores.
To put this in perspective, Kroger put more than twice its total annual profits into capital expenditures on average every year for thirty years.11Even more impressive, despite taking on $5.5 billion of junk bond debt to pay a onetime $40-per-share cash dividend plus an $8 junior debenture to fight off corporate raiders in 1988, Kroger continued its cash-intensive revamping throughout the 1980s and 1990s.12 Kroger modernized and turned over all its stores, improved the customer's shopping experience, radically expanded the variety of products offered, and paid off billions of dollars of debt.
Kroger's use of scanning technology to take hundreds of millions of crisp and crinkly dollar bills out of the warehouse and put them to better use became a key element in its ability to pull off its magic trick-pulling not one, not two, but three rabbits out of a hat.
Gillette also became a pioneer in the application of technology.
But Gillette's technology accelerators lay largely in manufacturing technology.
Think about the technology required to make billions-literally billions-of low-cost, high-tolerance razor blades.
When you and I pick up a Gillette razor, we expect the blade to be perfect and we expect it to be inexpensive per shave.
For example, to create the Sensor, Gillette invested over $200 million in design and development, most of it focused on manufacturing breakthroughs, and earned twenty-nine patents.13It pioneered the application of laser welding on a mass scale to shaving systems-a technology normally used for expensive and sophisticated products like heart pacemakers.14 The whole key to Gillette's shaving systems lay in manufacturing technology so unique and proprietary that Gillette protected it the way Coca-Cola protects its secret formula, complete with armed guards and security clearances.ls ]im Collins I T E C H N O L O G Y A C C E L E R A T O R S IN T H E 0- GREAT C Technology Accelerators Linked to Hedgehog Concept during Transition Era Abbott Pioneered application of computer technology to increase economic denominator of profit per employee.
Not a leader in pharmaceutical R&D- and inventory-tracking technologies-linked to the concept of being the "McDonald's" of big-ticket retailing, able to operate a geographically dispersed system with great consistency.
Fannie Mae Pioneered application of sophisticated algorithms and computer analysis to more accurately assess mortgage risk, thereby increasing economic denominator of profit per risk level.
Protects manufacturing technology secrets with the same fanaticism that Coca-Cola protects its formula.
Kimberly-Clark Pioneered application of manufacturing-process technology, especially in nonwoven materials, to support their passionate pursuit of product superiority.
Kroger Pioneered application of computer and information technology to the continuous modernization of superstores.
Good to Great Nucor Pioneered application of the most advanced minimill steel manufacturing technology.
"Shop the world over" for the most advanced technology.
Philip Morris Pioneered application of both packaging and manufacturing technology.
Bet on technology to make flip-top boxes-the first packaging innovation in twenty years in the industry.
Huge investment in manufacturing center to experiment with, test, and refine advanced manufacturing and quality techniques.
Pitney Bowes Pioneered application of advanced technology to the mailroom.
Later, Pitney invested heavily in electrical, software, communications, and Internet engineering for the most sophisticated back-office machines.
Made huge R&D investment to reinvent basic postage meter technology in the 1980s.
Walgreens Pioneered application of satellite communications and computernetwork technology, linked to its concept of convenient corner drugstores, tailored to the unique needs of specific demographics and locations.
Wells Fargo Pioneered application of technologies that would increase economic denominator of profit per employee.
Early leader in twenty-four-hour banking by phone, early adopter of ATMs, first to allow people to buy and sell mutual funds at an ATM, pioneer in Internet and electronic banking.
rim Collins Technology as an Accelerator, N o t a Creator, of Momentum When Jim Johnson became CEO of Fannie Mae, following David Maxwell, he and his leadership team hired a consulting firm to conduct a technology audit.
Fannie Mae ranked only a two.
So, following the principle of "first who," Kelvie was hired to move the company ahead.16 When Kelvie came to Fannie Mae in 1990, the company lagged about ten years behind Wall Street in the use of technology.
Over the next five years, Kelvie systematically took Fannie Mae from a 2 to a 3.8 on the four-point ranking."
"We moved technology out of the back office and harnessed it to transform every part of the business," said Kelvie.
Lenders using our technology reduced the loan-approval time from thirty days to thirty minutes and lowered the associated costs by over $1,000 per loan."
To date, the system has saved home buyers nearly $4 billion.18 Notice that the Fannie Mae transition began in 1981, with the arrival of David Maxwell, yet the company lagged behind in the application of technology until the early 1990s.
Yes, technology became of prime importance to Fannie Mae, but after it discovered its Hedgehog Concept and after it reached breakthrough.
Technology was a key part of what Fannie Mae leaders called "the second wind" of the transformation and acted as an accelerating factor.19The same pattern holds for Kroger, Gillette, Walgreens, and all the good-to-great companies- the pioneering application of technology usually came late in the transition and never at the start.
To make technology productive in a transformation from good to great means asking the following questions.
Does the technology fit directly with your Hedgehog Concept?
I f yes, then you need to become a pioneer in the application of that technology.
If no, then ask, do you need this technology at all?
If no, then the technology is irrelevant, and you can ignore it.
We came to see the pioneering application of technology as just one more way in which the good-to-great companies remained disciplined within the frame of their Hedgehog Concept.
Conceptually, their relationship to technology is no different from their relationship to any other category of decisions: disciplined people, who engage in disciplined thought, and who then take disciplined action.
If a technology doesn't fit squarely within their three circles, they ignore all the hype and fear and just go about their business with a remarkable degree of equanimity.
In the comparison companies, by contrast, we found only three cases of pioneering in the application of technology.
Those three cases-Chrysler (computer-aided design), Harris (electronics applied to printing), and Rubbermaid (advanced manufacturing) -were all unsustained comparisons, which demonstrates that technology alone cannot create sustained great results.
Chrysler, for instance, made superb use of advanced computer-aided and other design technologies but failed to link those technologies to a consistent Hedgehog Concept.
As Chrysler strayed outside the three circles in the mid-1980s, from Gulfstream jets to Maserati sports, cars, no advanced technology by itself could save the company from another massive downturn.
Technology without a clear Hedgehog Concept, and without the discipline to stay within the three circles, cannot make a company great.
The first is Time magazine's selection in 1999 of Albert Einstein as "Person of the 20th Century."
the choice of Einstein is surprising, compared to leaders like Churchill, Hitler, Stalin, and Gandhi- people who truly changed the course of human history, for better or worse.
Physicists point out that the scientific community would have reached an understanding of relativity with or without Einstein, perhaps five years later, certainly ten, but not fifty.20The Nazis never got the bomb, and the Allies would have won the Second World War without it (although it would have cost more Allied lives).
But the 20th century will be most remembered for its earthshaking advances in science and technology .
In a century that will be remembered foremost for its science and technology.
"~' In essence, the Time editors didn't pick the person of the century so much as they picked the theme of the century- technology and scienceand attached the most famous person to it.
None other than the poster child of e-commerce, Jeff Bezos of Amazon.com-reflecting yet again our cultural obsession with ,technology-driven change.
Clearly, a key item on our collective mind is technology, and its implications.
Taking a short break from the rigors of writing this book, I traveled to Minnesota to teach sessions at the Masters Forum.
The Masters Forum has held executive seminars for nearly fifteen years, and I was curious to know which themes appeared Good to Great 15s repeatedly over those years.
"One of the consistent themes," said Jim Ericson and Patty Griffin Jensen, program directors, "is technology, changeand the connection between the two."
"And they're always afraid that some new technology is going to sneak up on them from behind and knock them on the head.
They don't understand technology, and many fear it.
All they know for sure is that technology is an important force of change, and that they'd better pay attention to it."
Given our culture's obsession with technology, and given the pioneering application of technology in the good-to-great companies, you might expect that "technology" would absorb a significant portion of the discussion in our interviews with good-to-great executives.
I I 'I If technology is so vitally important, why did the good-to-great executives talk so little about it?
Certainly not because they ignored technology: They were technologically sophisticated and vastly superior to their comparisons.
Furthermore, a number of the good-to-great companies received extensive media coverage and awards for their pioneering use of technology.
Yet the executives hardly talked about technology.
It's as if the media articles and the executives were discussing two totally different sets of companies!
Nucor, for example, became widely known as one of the most aggressive pioneers in the application of mini-mill steel manufacturing, with dozens of articles and two books that celebrated its bold investments in continuous thin slab casting and electric arc furnaces.22Nucor became a cornerstone case at business schools as an example of unseating the old order through the advanced application of new technologies.
But when we asked Ken Iverson, C E O of Nucor during its transition, to name the top five factors in the shift from good to great, where on the list lim Collins do you think he put technology?
Here we have a consummate case study of upending the old order with new technology, and the C E O who made it happen doesn't even list technology in the top five factors in the shift from good to great.
This same pattern continued throughout the Nucor interviews.
Of the seven key executives and board members that we interviewed, only one picked technology as the number one factor in the shift, and most focused on other factors.
A few executives did talk about Nucor's big bets on technology somewhere in the interview, but they emphasized other factors even more-getting people with a farmer work ethic on the bus, getting the right people in key management positions, the simple structure and lack of bureaucracy, the relentless performance culture that increases profit per ton of finished steel.
Technology was part of the Nucor equation, but a secondary part.
One Nucor executive summed up, "Twenty percent of our success is the new technology that we embrace .
"24 Indeed, you could have given the exact same technology a t the exact same time to any number of companies with the exact same resources as Nucor-and even still, they would have failed to deliver Nucor's results.
Bethlehem Steel's difficulties had less to do with the mini-mill technology and more to do with its history of adversarial labor relations, which ultimately had its roots in unenlightened and ineffective management.
Bethlehem had already begun its long slide before Nucor and the other mini-mills had taken significant market share.25In fact, by the time Nucor made its technological breakthrough with continuous thin slab casting in 1986, Bethlehem had already lost more than 80 percent of its value relative to the market.
This is not to say that technology played no role in Bethlehem's demise; technology did play a role, and ultimately a significant one.
But technology's role was as an accelerator of I I Bethlehem's demise, not the cause of it.
Again, it's the same principle at work-technology as an accelerator, not a cause-only in this comparison case it is operating in reverse.
BETHLEHEM STEEL'S LONG DECLINE Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market, June1966 - December 2000 - Indeed, when we examined the comparison companies, we did not find a single example of a comparison company's demise coming primarily from a technology torpedo that blew it out of the water.
R. J. Reynolds lost its position as the number one tobacco company in the world not because of technology, but because RJR management thrashed about with undisciplined diversification and, later, went on a "let's make management rich at the expense of the company" buyout binge.
A&P fell from the secondlargest company in America to irrelevance not because it lagged behind Kroger in scanning technology, but because it lacked the discipline to confront the brutal facts of reality about the changing nature of grocery stores.
Jim Collins Throughout business history, early technology pioneers rarely prevail in the end.
VisiCalc, for example, was the first major personal computer spreadsheet.26Where is VisiCalc today?
VisiCalc eventually lost out to Lotus 1-2-3, which itself lost out to Lotus then went into a tailspin, saved only by selling out to IBM.28Similarly, the first portable computers came from now-dead companies, such as Osborne computers.29Today, we primarily use portables from companies such as Dell and Sony.
This pattern of the second (or third or fourth) follower prevailing over the early trailblazers shows up through the entire history of technological and economic change.
It lagged so far behind Remington Rand (which had the UNIVAC, the first commercially successful large-scale computer) that people called its first computer "IBM's UNIVAC.
"30 Boeing did not pioneer the commercial jet.
De Havilland did with the Comet, but lost ground when one of its early jets exploded in midair, not exactly a brand-building moment.
Boeing, slower to market, invested in making the safest, most reliable jets and dominated the airways for over three decades.31I could go on for pages.
GE did not pioneer the AC electrical system; Westinghouse did.32Palm Computing did not pioneer the personal digital assistant; Apple did, with its high-profile Newton.33AOL did not pioneer the consumer Internet community; CompuSewe and Prodigy did.34 We could make a long list of companies that were technology leaders but that failed to prevail in the end as great companies.
Indeed, the reliance on technology created a false sense of invulnerability.
The Americans lacked not technology, but a simple and coherent concept for the war, on which to attach that technology.
What little technology the North Vietnamese did employ, such as the AK 47 rifle (much more reliable and easier to maintain in the field than the complicated M-16), linked directly to that simple concept.
If you ever find yourself thinking that technology alone holds the key to success, then think again of Vietnam.
Indeed, thoughtless reliance on technology is a liability, not an asset.
Yes, when used right-when linked to a simple, clear, and coherent concept rooted in deep understanding-technology is an essential driver in accelerating forward momentum.
But when used wrong-when grasped as an easy solution, without deep understanding of how it links to a clear and coherent concept- technology simply accelerates your own selfcreated demise.
"There must be a technology chapter," said Scott Jones.
"We're bombarded by the importance of technology these days at the business school.
"But it seems to me," countered Brian Larsen, "that our technology finding is just a special case of disciplined action, and it belongs in the previous chapter.
Disciplined action means staying within the three circles, and that's the essence of our technology finding."
"Every one of the companies became extreme pioneers in the application of technology long before the rest of the world became technology obsessed."
"But compared to other findings like Level 5, the Hedgehog Concept, and 'first who,' technology feels like a much smaller issue," retorted Amber Young.
"I agree with Brian: Technology is important, but as a subset of discipline or perhaps the flywheel."
Then Chris Jones, in her typically ]in Collins quiet and thoughtful way, asked a key question: "Why did the good-togreat companies maintain such a balanced perspective on technology, when most companies become reactionary, lurching and running about like Chicken Little, as we're seeing with the Internet?"
When we asked George Harvey to describe his motivation for bringing change to Pitney Bowes in the 1980s, he said: "I've always wanted to see Pitney Bowes as a great company.
"35O r as Wayne Sanders summed up about the ethos that came to typify the inner workings of Kimberly-Clark: "We're just never satisfied.
Good t o Great Never was there a better example of this difference than during the technology bubble of the late 1990s, which happened to take place right smack in the middle of the research on good to great.
It served as an almost perfect stage to watch the difference between great and good play itself out, as the great ones responded like Walgreens-with calm equanimity and quiet deliberate steps forward-while the mediocre ones lurched about in fearful, frantic reaction.
Indeed, the big point of this chapter is not about technology per se.
No technology, no matter how amazing- not computers, not telecommunications, not robotics, not the Internet-can by itself ignite a shift from good to great.
No technology can make you Level 5.
No technology can turn the wrong people into the right people.
No technology can instill the discipline to confront brutal facts of reality, nor can it instill unwavering faith.
No technology can supplant the need for deep understanding of the three circles and the translation of that understanding into a simple Hedgehog Concept.
No technology can create a culture of discipline.
No technology can instill the simple inner belief that leaving unrealized potential on the table-letting something remain good when it can become great-is a secular sin.
Those that stay true to these fundamentals and maintain their balance, even in times of great change and disruption, will accumulate the momentum that creates breakthrough momentum.
This entirely skews our perception of how such transformations happen, making it seem as if they jumped right to breakthrough as some sort of an overnight metamorphosis.
rim Collins For example, on August 27, 1984, Forbes magazine published an article on Circuit City.
It wasn't that big of an article, just two pages, and it questioned whether Circuit City's recent growth could ~ o n t i n u eStill, .
~ there it was, the first public acknowledgment that Circuit City had broken through.
First, he rebuilt his executive team and undertook an objective look at the brutal facts of reality, both internal and external.
In 1974, still struggling with a crushing debt load, Wurtzel and his team began to experiment with a warehouse showroom style of retailing (large inventories of name brands, discount pricing, and immediate delivery) and built a prototype of this model in Richmond, Virginia, to sell appliances.
In 1976, the company began to experiment with selling consumer electronics in the warehouse showroom format, and in 1977, it transformed the concept into the first-ever Circuit City store.
The concept met with success, and the company began systematically converting its stereo stores into Circuit City stores.
In 1982-with nine years of accumulated turns on the flywheel-Wurtzel and his team committed fully to the concept of the Circuit City superstore.
Over the next five years, as it shifted entirely to this concept, Circuit City generated the highest total return to shareholders of any company on the New York .
~ 1982 to 1999, Circuit City generated cumulative Stock E ~ c h a n g eFrom stock returns twenty-two times better than the market, handily beating Intel, Wal-Mart, GE, Hewlett-Packard, and Coca-Cola.
Not surprisingly, Circuit City then found itself a prime subject for media attention.
It's as if the company hadn't even existed prior to that, despite having traded on a major stock exchange since 1968, and despite the remarkable progress made by Wurtzel and his team in the decade leading up to the breakthrough point.
The Circuit City experience reflects a common pattern.
In case after case, we found fewer articles in the decade leading up to the point of transition than in the decade after, by an average factor of nearly three times.4 Good to Great CIRCUIT CITY Cumulat~veValue of $1 Invested, Number of Art~clesFound December 31, 1972 - December 31, 1992 C~rcu~t city $31 I 64 $300 $200 $1 00 General Market $8 35 For example, Ken Iverson and Sam Siege1 began turning the Nucor flywheel in 1965.
If you had asked executives at Bethlehem Steel or U.S. Steel about "The Nucor Threat" in 1970, they would have laughed, if they even recognized the company name at all (which is doubtful).
By 1975, the year of its transition point on the stock chart, Nucor had already built its third mini-mill, long established its unique culture of productivity, and was well on its way to .
~ the first becoming the most profitable steel company in A r n e r i ~ a Yet major article in Business Week did not appear until 1978, thirteen years after the start of the transition, and not in Fortune until sixteen years out.
From 1965 through 1975, we found only eleven articles on Nucor, none of them significant.
Then from 1976 through 1995, we collected ninetysix articles on Nucor, forty of them being major profiles or nationally prominent features.
"The Remarkable Revolution of the Egg!"
But the good-to-great executives simply could not pinpoint a single key event or moment in time that exemplified the transition.
Even in the most dramatic case in our study-Kimberly-Clark selling the mills-the executives described an organic, cumulative process.
"Darwin did not change the direction of the company overnight," said one Kimberly-Clark executive.
It took years to gain enough momentum for the press to openly herald Kimberly-Clark's shift from good to great.
Forbes wrote, "When .
Kimberly-Clark decided to go head to head against P&G .
"8 The amount of time between the two Forbes articles?
While working on the project, we made a habit of asking executives who visited our research laboratory what they would want to know from the research.
"Our " ~ change was a major change, and yet in many respects simply a series of incremental changes-this is what made that change successful.
"'O Circuit City "The transition to focus on the superstore didn't happen overnight.
We first considered the concept in 1974, but we didn't convert fully to Circuit City superstores until about ten years later, after we'd refined the concept and built enough momentum to bet our whole f ~ ~ t uon r e it.""
Fannie Mae "There was no one magical event, no one turning point.
"12 Gillette "We didn't really make a big conscious decision or launch a big program to initiate a major change or transition.
Individually and collectively we were coming to conclusions about what we could do to dramati- Kimberly-Clark "I don't think it was done as bluntly as it sounds.
"14 Kroger "It wasn't a flash from the blue.
T h e major thing that Lyle did was to say that we're going to change beginning now, on a very deliberate basis.
"15 Good to Great Nucor "We did not make a decision that this was what we stood for at any specific moment.
"I6 Philip Morris "It's impossible to think of one big thing that would exemplify a shift from good to great because our success was evolutionary as opposed to revolutionary, building success upon success.
Pitney Bowes "We didn't talk so much of change.
We recognized early on not so much that we needed to change, but that we needed to evolve, which recognizes that we've got to do things differently.
We realized that evolution Walgreens "There was no seminal meeting or epiphany moment, no one big bright light that came on like a lightbulb.
"I9 Wells Fargo "It wasn't a single switch that was thrown at one time.
"20 When teaching this point, I sometimes use an example from outside my research that perfectly illustrates the idea: the UCLA Bruins basketball dynasty of the 1960s and early 1970s.
At Circuit City, the buildup stage lasted nine years, at Nucor ten years, whereas at Gillette it took only five years, at Fannie Mae only three years, and at Pitney Bowes about two years.
NOT JUST A LUXURY OF CIRCUMSTANCE It's important to understand that following the buildup-breakthrough flywheel model is not just a luxury of circumstance.
People who say, "Hey, but we've got constraints that prevent us from taking this longerterm approach," should keep in mind that the good-to-great companies followed this model no matter how dire the short-term circumstancesderegulation in the case of Wells Fargo, looming bankruptc y in the cases of Nucor and Circuit City, potential takeover threats in the cases of Gillette and Kroger, or million-dollar-a-day losses in the case of Fannie Mae.
"I just don't agree with those who say you can't build an enduring great company because Wall Street won't let you," said David Maxwell of Fannie Mae.
From the end of 1984 to the year 2000, $1 invested in Fannie Mae multiplied sixty-four times, beating the i The key, we learned, is to harness the flywheel to manage these shortterm pressures.
One particularly elegant method for doing so came from Abbott Laboratories, using a mechanism it called the Blue Plans.
Meanwhile, it kept a rank-ordered list of proposed entrepreneurial projects that had not yet been funded- the Blue Plans.
It would then take the difference between the "make the analysts happy" growth and the actual growth and channel those funds into the Blue Plans.
It was a brilliant mechanism for managing short-term pressures while systematically investing in the future.23 We found no evidence of anything like the Blue Plans at Abbott's comparison company.
Instead, Upjohn executives would pump up the stock with a sales job ("Buy into our future '), reverently intoning the phrase "investing for the long-term," especially when the company failed to deliver current results.24 Upjohn continuall y threw money after harebrained projects like its Rogaine baldness cure, attempting to circumvent buildup and jump right to breakthrough with a big hit.
Indeed, Upjohn reminded us of a gambler, putting a lot of chips on red at Las Vegas and saying, "See, we're investing for the future."
Not surprisingly, Abbott became a consistent performer and a favorite holding on Wall Street, while Upjohn became a consistent disappoint7 I I Tim Collins ment.
Then they dramatically diverged, with Upjohn falling more than six times behind Abbott before being acquired in 1995.
ABBOTTVERSUS UPJOHN Cumulative Value of $ 1 Invested, 1959 - 1995 Abbott: $271 Like Fannie Mae and Abbott, all the good-to-great companies effectively managed Wall Street during their buildup-breakthrough years, and they saw no contradiction between the two.
They simply focused on accumulating results, often practicing the time-honored discipline of underpromising and overdelivering.
"The one about commitment, alignment, and how they managed change."
"Well," said one team member, "a lot of the executives who made the transition-well, they think it's a stupid question.
We've got to understand how they overcame resistance to change and got people lined up."
I fully expected to find that getting everyone lined up-"creating alignment," to use the jargon-would be one of the top challenges faced by executives working to turn good into great.
After all, nearly every executive who'd visited the laboratory had asked this question in one form or another.
"How do we get people to embrace change?"
To my great surprise, we did not find the question of alignment to be a key challenge faced by the good-to-great leaders.
Consider Kroger.
How do you get a company of over 50,000 peoplecashiers, baggers, shelf stockers, produce washers, and so forth-to embrace a radical new strategy that will eventually change virtually every aspect of how the company builds and runs grocery stores?
Jim Herring, the Level 5 leader who initiated the transformation of Kroger, told us that he avoided any attempts at hoopla and motivation.
For example, Nucor began turning the flywheel in 1965, at first just trying to avoid bankruptcy, then later building its first steel mills because it could not find a reliable supplier.
Nucor people discovered that they had a knack for making steel better and cheaper than anyone else, so they built two, and then three, additional mini-mills.
Then, around 1975, it dawned on the Nucor people that if they just kept pushing on the flywheel, they could become the number one, most profitable steel company in America.
7726It took over two decades, but Nucor kept pushing the flywheel, eventually generating greater profits than any other steel company on the Fortune 1000 list.27 Stop and think about it for a minute.
When the right people see a simple plan born of confronting the brutal facts-a plan developed from understanding, not bravado-they are likely to say, "That 11 work.
When they see the monolithic unity of the executive team behind the simple plan and the selfless, 17s lim Collins dedicated qualities of Level 5 leadership, they'll drop their cynicism.
They would push the flywheel in one direction, then stop, change course, and throw it in a new direction-and then they would stop, change course, and throw it into yet another direction.
Consider the case of Warner-Lambert, the direct comparison company to Gillette.
In 1979, Warner-Lambert told Business Week that it aimed to be a leading consumer products company.28 One year later, in 1980, it did an abrupt about-face and turned its sights on health care, saying, "Our flat-out aim is to go after Merck, Lilly, SmithKline - everybody and his brother.
"29 In 1981, the company reversed course yet again and returned to diversification and consumer goods.30 Six years later, in 1987, Warner-Lambert did another U-turn, away from consumer goods, to try once again to be like Merck.
In the early 1990s, reacting to Clinton-era health care reform, the company threw itself into reverse yet again and reembraced diversification and consumer brands.j2 Good to Great R ESU LTS REACTION, WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING \ No BUILDUP; No ACCUMULATED MOMENTUM NEW DIRECTION, ROGRAM, LEADER, EVENT, FAD, Each new Warner-Lambert C E O brought his own new program and halted the momentum of his predecessor.
Three years later, his successor, Joe Williams, extracted Warner-Lambert from the hospital supply business and took a $550 million write-off.33He tried to focus the company on beating Merck, but his successor threw the company back to diversification and consumer goods.
From 1979 through 1998, Warner-Lambert underwent three major restructurings - one per C E O - hacking away 20,000 people in search of quick breakthrough results.
Stock returns flattened relative to the market and Warner-Lambert disappeared as an independent company, swallowed up by P f i ~ e r .
~ ~ rim Collins The Warner-Lambert case is extreme, but we found some version of the doom loop in every comparison company.
While the specific permutations of the doom loop varied from company to company, there were some highly prevalent patterns, two of which deserve particular note: the misguided use of acquisitions and the selection of leaders who undid the work of previous generations.
The Misguided U s e of Acquisitions Peter Drucker once observed that the drive for mergers and acquisitions comes less from sound reasoning and more from the fact that doing deals is a much more exciting way to spend your day than doing actual work.35 Indeed, the comparison companies would have well understood the popular bumper sticker from the 1980s, "When the going gets tough, we go shopping!"
To understand the role of acquisitions in the process of going from good to great, we undertook a systematic qualitative and quantitative analysis of all acquisitions and divestitures in all the companies in our study, from ten years before the transition date through 1998.
While we noticed no particular pattern in the amount or scale of acquisitions, we did note a significant difference in the success rate of the acquisitions in the good-togreat companies versus the comparisons.
I Leaders Who Stop the Flywheel \ I I I/ T h e other frequently observed doom loop pattern is that of new leaders who stepped in, stopped an already spinning flywheel, and threw it in an entirely new direction.
Consider Harris Corporation, which applied many of the good-to-great concepts in the early 1960s and began a classic buildup process that led to breakthrough results.
George Dively and his successor, Richard Tullis, identified a Hedgehog Concept, based on the understanding that Harris could be the best in the world at applying technology to printing and communications.
Although it did not adhere to this concept with perfect discipline (Tullis had a penchant for straying a bit outside the three circles), the company did make enough progress to produce significant results.
In 1978, Joseph Boyd became chief executive.
"Horrendous" sofhvare-development problems delayed introduction of Harris' first workstation as the company stumbled onto the battlefield to confront IBM, DEC, and Wang.j8Then, in an attempt to jump right to a new breakthrough, Harris spent a third of its entire corporate net lim Collins worth to buy Lanier Business Products, a company in the low-end word processing business.j9 Computenvorld magazine wrote: "Boyd targeted the automated office as a key.
Good to Great H O W TO T E L L IF Y O U ' R E O N T H E Signs That You're on the Flywheel (Good-to-Great Companies) Signs That You're in the Doom Loop (Comparison Companies) Follow a pattern of buildup leading to breakthrough.
Implement big programs, radical change efforts, dramatic revolutions; chronic restructuring-always looking for a miracle moment or new savior.
Confront the brutal facts to see clearly what steps must be taken to build momentum.
Embrace fads and engage in management hoopla, rather than confront the brutal facts.
Attain consistency with a clear Hedgehog Concept, resolutely staying within the three circles.
Follow the pattern of disciplined people ("first who"), disciplined thought, disciplined action.
Jump right to action, without disciplined thought and without first getting the right people on the bus.
Harness appropriate technologies to your Hedgehog Concept, to accelerate momentum.
Run about like Chicken Little in reaction to technology change, fearful of being left behind.
Make major acquisitions aber breakthrough (if at all) to accelerate momentum.
Make major acquisitions before breakthrough, in a doomed attempt to create momentum.
Jim Collins Signs T h a t You're on the Flywheel (Good-to- Great Companies) Signs That You're i n the Doom Loop (Comparison Companies) Let results do most of the Sell the future, to compensate for lack of results.
It all starts with Level 5 leaders, who naturally gravitate toward the flywheel model.
Equally important is to remember the Stockdale Paradox: "We're not going to hit breakthrough by Christmas, but if we keep pushing in the right direction, we will eventually hit breakthrough."
This process of confronting the brutal facts helps you see the obvious, albeit difficult, steps that must be taken to turn the flywheel.
Next, when you attain deep understanding about the three circles of your Hedgehog Concept and begin to push in a direction consistent with that understanding, you hit breakthrough momentum and accelerate with key accelerators, chief among them pioneering the application of technology tied directly back to your three circles.
Ultimately, to reach breakthrough means having the discipline to make a series of good decisions consistent with your Hedgehog Concept-disciplined action, following from disciplined people who exercise disciplined thought.
Briefly, Built to Last, based on a six-year research project conducted at Stanford Business School in the early 1990s, answered the question, What does it take to start and build an enduring great company from the ground up?
We examined companies like Procter & Gamble (founded in 1837), American Express (founded in 1850), Johnson & Johnson (founded in 1886), and G E (founded in 1892).
O n e of the companies, Citicorp (now Citigroup), was founded in 1812, the same year Napoleon marched into Moscow!
The "youngest" companies in the study were Wal-Mart and Sony, which trace their origins back to 1945.
Similar to this book, we used direct comparison Good to Great 18s companies- 3M versus Norton, Walt Disney versus Columbia Pictures, Marriott versus Howard Johnson, and so forth-for eighteen paired comparisons.
"I seem to recall that you got the idea for this study when a McKinsey partner said that Built to Last didn't answer the question of how to change a good company into a great one," noted Paul Weissman.
To make the shift from a company with sustained great results to an enduring great company of iconic stature, apply the central concept from Built to Last: Discover your core values and purpose beyond just making money (core ideology) and combine this with the dynamic of preserve the corelstimulate progress.
Consider, for example, the buildup-breakthrough flywheel pattern in the evolution of Wal-Mart.
Walton built incrementally, step by step, turn by turn of the flywheel, until the Hedgehog Concept of large discount marts popped out as a natural evolutionary step in the mid1960s.
It took Walton a quarter of a century to grow from that single dime store to a chain of 38 Wal-Marts.
Then, from 1970 to 2000, Wal-Mart hit breakthrough momentum and exploded to over 3,000 stores with over $150 billion (yes, billion) in revenues 2 Just like the story of the chicken jumping out of the egg that we discussed in the flywheel chapter, WalMart had been incubating for decades before the egg cracked open.
And like most overnight successes, it was about twenty years in the making.3 If there ever was a classic case of buildup leading to a Hedgehog Concept, followed by breakthrough momentum in the flywheel, Wal-Mart is it.
The only difference is that Sam Walton followed the model as an entrepreneur building a great company from the ground up, rather than as a C E O transforming an established company from good to great.
But it's the same basic idea.4 Hewlett-Packard provides another excellent example of the good-togreat ideas at work in the formative stages of a Built to Last company.
After World War 11, even as revenues shrank with the end of their wartime contracts, they hired a whole batch of fabulous people streaming out of government labs, with nothing specific in mind for them t o do.
Recall Packard s Law, which we cited in chapter 3: "No company can grow revenues consistently faster than its ability to get enough of the right people to implement that growth and still become a great company."
Years after HP had established itself as one of the most important technology companies in the world, Hewlett maintained a remarkable personal humility.
Only recently, at an executive council meeting, Hewlett remarked: "Look, we've grown because the industry grew.
"As I look back on my life's work," he said, "I'm probably most proud of having helped create a company that by virtue of its values, practices, and success has had a tremendous impact on ~ "HP Way," as the way companies are managed around the w ~ r l d . "
That extra dimension is a guiding philosophy or a "core ideology," which consists of core values and a core purpose (reason for being beyond just making money).
A company need not have passion for its customers (Sony didn't), or respect for the individual (Disney didn't), or quality (Wal-Mart didn't), or social responsibility (Ford didn't) in order to become enduring and great.
This notion of preserving your core ideology is a central feature of enduring great companies.
Throughout all these dramatic changes-from cartoons to full-length feature animation, from the Mickey Mouse Club to Disney World-the company held firmly to a consistent set of core values that included passionate belief in creative imagination, fanatic attention to detail, abhorrence of cynicism, and preservation of the "Disney Magic."
Walt Disney provides a classic case of preserve the core and stimulate progress, holding a core ideology fixed while changing strategies and practices over time, and its adherence to this principle is the fundamental reason why it has endured as a great company.
Good to Great 1920s: Cartoons 1930s: Full-length feature animation 1950s: Television, Mickey Mouse Club 1960s: Theme parks 1980s: International Preserve the CorelStimulate Progress a t Walt Disney Company, 1920s-1990s GOOD BHAGS, BAD BHAGS, AND OTHER CONCEPTUAL LINKS In the table on page 198, I've outlined a sketch of conceptual links between the two studies.
Instead of choosing A OR B, figure out how to have A AND B-purpose AND profit, continuity AND change, freedom AND responsibility, etc.
Preserve the core ideology as an anchor point while stimulating change, improvement, innovation, and renewal in everything else.
Set and achieve BHAGs consistent with the core ideology.
Confront the Brutal Facts (Stockdale Paradox) Clock Building, Not Time Telling: Creating a climate where the truth is heard is clock building, especially if you create red flag mechanisms.
Genius of AND: Confront the brutal facts of your current reality AND retain unwavering faith that you will prevail in the end- the Stockdale Paradox.
Core Ideology: Confronting the brutal facts clarifies the values an organization truly holds as core versus those that it would like to hold as core.
L l i m Collins Concepts i n Good to Great Relationship to Concepts i n Built to last* Hedgehog Concept Clock Building, Not Time Telling: The Council mechanism is consummate clock building.
(The Three Circles) Genius o f AND: Deep understanding AND incredible simplicity.
Culture of Discipline Clock Building, Not Time Telling: Operating through sheer force of personality as a disciplinarian is time telling; building an enduring culture of discipline is clock building.
Core Ideology: A culture of discipline ejects those who do not share the values and standards of an organization.
Preserve the CorelStimulate Progress: When you have a culture of discipline, you can give people more freedom to experiment and find their own best path to results.
g Genius ofAND:Shun technology fads AND pioneer the application of technology.
Core Ideology: In a great company, technology is subservient to core values, not the other way around Preserve the CorelStimulate Progress: The right technologies accelerate momentum in the flywheel, toward the achievement of BHAGs.
Flywheel, Not Doom Loop i Clock Building, Not Time Telling: The flywheel effect creates the sustained building of momentum, and does not depend on the presence of a charismatic visionary to motivate people Genius of AND: Evolutionary, incremental process AND revolutionary, dramatic results Core Ideology: The doom loop makes it alinost impossible to instill core values and purpose, as people chronically wonder, "Who are we7 What do we stand for?"
I Preserve the CorelStimulate Progress: The smooth consistency of the flywheel and the cumulative building of momentum to a point of breakthrough create the perfect conditions for instilling core values while stimulating change and progress * See Bullt to Last Successful Hablts of Vzszonary Companies, Collins and Porras, HarperBuslness, 1994 I -1 jim Collins I am not going to belabor all the links from the above table, but I would like to highlight one particularly powerful link: the connection between BHAGs and the three circles of the Hedgehog Concept.
A superb example of this comes from Boeing in the 1950s.
Until the early 1950s, Boeing focused on building huge flying machines for the militarythe B-17 Flying Fortress, the B-29 Superfortress, and the B-52 intercontinental jet bomber Stratofortress.15However, Boeing had virtually no presence in the commercial aircraft market, and the airlines showed no interest in buying aircraft from Boeing.
Why don't you just stick with that," they said in response to Boeing's inquiries.)
Today, we take for granted that most air travel takes place on Boeing jets, but in 1952, almost no one outside the military flew on Boeing.16 Wisely, through the 1940s, Boeing had stayed away from the commercial sphere, an arena in which McDonnell Douglas had vastly superior abilities in the smaller, propeller-driven planes that composed the commercial fleet.17 In the early 1950s, however, Boeing saw an opportunity to leapfrog McDonnell Douglas by marrying its experience with large air- Good to Great What drives * Includes your core values and purpose , I !
Led by a Level 5 leader named Bill Allen, Boeing executives debated the wisdom of moving into the commercial sphere.
They came to understand that, whereas Boeing could not have been the best commercial plane maker a decade earlier, the cumulative experience in jets and big planes they had gained from military contracts now made such a dream possible.
So, in 1952, Bill Allen and his team made the decision to spend a quarter of the company's entire net worth to build a prototype jet that could be used for commercial aviation.18They built the 707 and launched Boeing on a bid to become the leading commercial aviation company in the world.
Three decades later, after producing five of the most successful commercial jets in history (the 707,727,737,747, and 757), Boeing stood as the absolute, unquestioned greatest company in the commercial airplane industry, worldwide.19 Not until the late 1990s would Boeing's number one position be seriously challenged, and it would take a government consortium in the form of Airbus to do it.20 rim Collins Here is the key point: Boeing's BHAG, while huge and daunting, was not any random goal.
Boeing's executives understood with calm, equanimity that (1) the company could become the best in the world at commercial jet manufacturing even though it had no presence in the market, (2) the shift would significantly improve Boeing's economics by increasing profit per aircraft model, and (3) the Boeing people were very passionate about the idea.
Boeing acted with understanding, not bravado, at this pivotal moment in its history, and that is one of the key reasons why it endured as a great company.
He was referring to the Hedgehog Concept of the program, captured in the simple statement: We run best at the end.
This created the strongest culture of discipline possible, as the seven varsity runners felt personally responsible for winning state-a commitment made not to the coaches, but to each other.
She found, however, that most of what her classmates went on to do-investment banking on Wall Street, starting Internet companies, management consulting, working for IBM, or whateverheld no meaning for her.
Or like Darwin Smith at Kimberly-Clark, they might derive a tremendous sense of purpose from the inner quest for excellence itself, being driven from within to make an y thing they touch the best it can be.
Or perhaps like Lyle Everingham at Kroger or Cork Walgreen at Walgreens, they might have grown up in the business and just really love it.
But under what conditions will you have the drive and discipline to fully practice the other findings?
The eleven good-to-great companies were the only examples from our initial universe of Fortune 500 companies that met all the criteria for entrance into the study; they do not represent a sample.
We do not need to worry that a second set of companies in the Fortune 500 went from good to great-not by our criteria, anyway-by other methods.
Many companies show a sharp rise for five or ten years with a hit product or charismatic leader, but few companies manage to achieve fifteen years.
"You did a very purposeful selection and found the eleven companies from the Fortune 500 that met your criteria.
T h e absence of apples-to-apples stock return data from non-U.S. exchanges would undermine the consistency of our selection process.
Also, I believe that much of what we found-Level 5 leadership and the flywheel, for instance-will be harder to swallow for Americans than for people from other cultures.
Good to Great Q: Why don't any high-technology companies appear in the study set?
Most technology companies were eliminated from consideration because they are not old enough to show the good-to-great pattern.
Of the technology companies that did have more than thirty years of history, none showed the specific good-to-great pattern we were looking for.
Intel, for example, never had a fifteen-year period of only good performance; Intel has always been great.
If this study were to be repeated in ten or twenty years, I would fully expect that high-technology companies would make the list.
As Robert Burgelman, one of my favorite professors from Stanford Business School, taught me years ago, "The single biggest danger in business and life, other than outright failure, is to be successful without being resolutely clear about why you are successful in the first place."
One current case for concern is Gillette, which produced eighteen years of exceptional performance-rising to over 9 times the market from 1980 to 1998-but stumbled in 1999.
We believe the principal source of this difficulty lies in Gillette's need for greater discipline in sticking to businesses that fit squarely inside the three circles of its Hedgehog Concept.
Of even greater concern is the clamoring from industry analysts that Gillette needs a charismatic C E O from outside the company to come in and shake things up.
If Gillette brings in a Level 4 leader, then the probability that Gillette will prove to be an enduring great company will diminish considerably.
Another troubling case is Nucor, which hit its peak in 1994 at fourteen times the market, then fell off considerably as it experienced management turmoil in the wake of Ken Iverson's retirement.
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market, 1927 - 2000 lasted only a short time in the job, before being ousted in an ugly executivesuite battle.
One of the architects of this boardroom coup indicated in the Charlotte News and Observer (June 1 1, 1999, page D l ) that Iverson had fallen from Level 5 leadership in his old age and had begun to display more egocentric Level 4 traits.
to the grave ent story, arguing that the real problem is current management's desire to diversify Nucor away from its Hedgehog Concept.
"Iverson just shakes his head," wrote the News and Observer, "saying it was to get away from diversification that Nucor became a narrowly focused steel products company in the first place."
Whatever the case-loss of Level 5 leadership or straying from the Hedgehog Concept, or both-the future of Nucor as a great company remains uncertain at the time of this writing.
Good to Great Q: How do you reconcile Philip Morris as a "great" company with the fact that it sells tobacco?
Perhaps no company anywhere generates as much antipathy as Philip Morris.
Ironically, Philip Morris has the longest track record of exceptional performance from the date of its transition-thirty-four years-and is the only company that made it into both studies (Good to Great and Built to Last).
Philip Morris blew away all the other cigarette companies, including its direct comparison, R. J. Reynolds.
But for Philip Morris to have a viable future will require confronting square-on the brutal facts about society's relationship to tobacco and the social perception of the tobacco industry.
Whatever one's personal feelings about the tobacco industry (and there was a wide range of feelings on the research team and some very heated debates), having Philip Morris in both Good to Great and Built to Last has proved very instructive.
Q: Can a company have a Hedgehog Concept and have a highly diverse business portfolio?
One obvious exception to this is GE, but we can explain this case by suggesting that GE has a very unusual and subtle Hedgehog Concept that unifies its agglomeration of enterprises.
In our view, that is the essence of GE's Hedgehog Concept.
The one that drains less management talent would fit with the Hedgehog Concept and the other would not.
GE's Hedgehog Concept, properly conceived, enables the company to operate in a diverse set of businesses yet remain squarely focused on the intersection of the three circles.
Q: What is the role of the board of directors in a transformation from good to great?
The recent spate of boards enamored with charismatic CEOs, especially "rock star" celebrity types, is one of the most damaging trends for the long-term health of companies.
Boards should familiarize themselves with the characteristics of Level 5 leadership and install such leaders into positions of responsibility.
Ms. Ricardo-Campbell was a Gillette board member during the Colman Mockler era and provides a detailed account of how a responsible board wrestled with the difficult and complex question of price versus value.
Q: Can hot young technology companies in a go-go world have Level 5 leaders?
Mr. Morgridge was the transition CEO who turned a small, struggling company in the Bay Area into one of the great technology companies of the last decade.
With the flywheel turning, this unassuming and relatively unknown man stepped into the background and turned the company over to the next generation of leadership.
It goes by the name Cisco Systems.
Q: How can you practice the discipline of "first who7'when there is a shortage of outstanding people?
First, at the top levels of your organization, you absolutely must have the discipline not to hire until you find the right people.
Meanwhile, work continuously on your own development toward Level 5 leadership.
To satisfy this criterion, the company had to appear in the 1995 Fortune 500 rankings, published in 1996. .
The sifting process had four layers of analysis: I; I CRSP dat; 'cted Into Industrv Cut 1: From t h e Universe of C o m p a n i e s t o 1,435 Companies We elected to begin our search with a list of companies that appeared on the Fortune rankings of America's largest public companies, going as far back as 1965, when the list came into existence.
Most people know these rankings as the "Fortune 500," although the total number of companies listed may be as many as 1,000 Appendix 1.A because Fortune occasionally changes the size and format of its lists.
As a base set to begin our analysis, the Fortune largest-companies ranking has two key advantages.
Therefore, nearly every company in the Fortune ranking met our criterion of being an established ongoing company at the time of transition.
Second, all companies in the Fortune ranki n g ~are publicly traded, which allowed us to use financial stock return data as the basis for more rigorous screening and analysis.
Restricting our set to the Fortune rankings has one obvious disidvantage: It limits our- analysis to U.S.-based companies.
C u t 2: F r o m 1 , 4 3 5 C o m p a n i e s t o 1 2 6 C o m p a n i e s Our next step was to use data from the University of Chicago Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) to make our final selection of good-togreat companies.
We used the published Fortune rates-ofreturn data to reduce the candidate list.
Fortune calculates the ten-year return to investors for each company in the rankings back to 1965.
More specifically, the 126 companies selected passed any one of the following tests: Test 1: The compound annual total return to investors over the period 1985-1995 exceeded the compound annual average return to investors for the Fortune Industrial and Service listings over the same period by 30 percent (i.e., total returns exceeded average returns by 1.3 times), and the company showed evidence of average or below-average performance in the prior two decades (1965-1985).
Test 2: The compound annual total return to investors over the period 1975-1995 exceeded the compound annual average return to investors for the Fortune Industrial and Service listings over the same period by 30 percent (i.e., total returns exceeded average returns by 1.3 times), and the company showed evidence of average or below-average performance in the prior decade (1965-1975).
Appendix 1.A Test 3: The compound annual total return to investors over the period 1965-1995 exceeded the compound annual average return to investors for the Fortune Industrial and Service listings over the same period by 30 percent (i.e., total returns exceeded average returns by 1.3 times).
The Fortune listings do not contain ten-year returns before 1965, so we decided to include all top performers over the three-decade period in the initial set.
Test 4: Companies founded after 1970 and whose total return to investors over the period 1985-1995 or 1975-1995 exceeded the average return to investors for the Fortune Industrial and Service listings over the same period by 30 percent (i.e., total returns exceeded average returns by 1.3 times) but that did not meet the above criteria due to a lack of data in the Fortune list in prior decades.
This allowed us to closely consider any companies that performed well in later decades but did not show up earlier on the Fortune listings.
C u t 3: F r o m 1 2 6 C o m p a n i e s t o 1 9 C o m p a n i e s Drawing upon the research database at the University of Chicago Center for Research in Securities Pricing (CRSP), we analyzed the cumulative stock returns of each candidate company relative to the general market, looking for the good-to-great stock return pattern.
In some cases, the company likely had more years of X period performance prior to the transition year, but the stock became traded on the NASDAQ, NYSE, or AMEX during the X period; therefore, our data did not go back far enough to verib an X period.
Appendix 1.A CUT 3 ANALYSIS RESULTS Companies Admitted i n Cut 2 1 AFLAC, Inc. 2 AMP, Inc. 3 Abbott Labs 4 Albertson's, Inc. 5 Alco Standard, Corp. 6 Allegheny Teledyne, Inc. 7 ALLTEL Corp. 8 American Express Co. 9 American Stores Co. 10 Anheuser-Busch Companies, Inc. 11 Applied Materials, Inc. 12 Archer Daniels Midland Co. 13 Automatic Data Processing 14 BANC ONE Corp. 15 Bank of New York, Inc. 16 Barnett Banks 17 Berkshire Hathaway, Inc. 18 Boeing Co. 19 Browning-Ferris Industries 20 Campbell Soup Co. 21 Cardinal Health 22 Chrysler 23 Circuit City Stores, Inc. 24 Coca-Cola Co. 25 Colgate-Palmolive Co. 26 Comerica, Inc. 27 Computer Associates 28 Computer Sciences Corp. 29 ConAgra, Inc. 30 Conseco 31 CPC International (later Bestfoods) 32 CSX 33 Dean Foods Co. 34 Dillard's 3 5 Dover Corp. 36 DuPont 37 Engelhard Corp. 38 FMC Corp. 39 Federal National Mortgage Assn.
The Gap, Inc. GEICO General Dynamics Corp. General Electric Co. General Mills, Inc. General Re Corp.
Giant Foods, Inc. Gillette Co. Golden West Financial Corp. Hasbro, Inc. Heinz, H. J. Co. Hershey Foods Corp. Hewlett-Packard Co. Humana, Inc. Illinois Tool Works, Inc. Intel Corp. Johnson &Johnson Johnson Controls, Inc. Kellogg Co. Kelly Services, Inc. KeyCorp Kimberly-Clark Corp. Kroger Co. Eli Lilly and Co. Loews Corp. Loral Corp. Lowe's Companies, Inc. MCI Communications Corp. Mapco, Inc. Masco Corp. Matte1 McDonald's Corp. Melville Merck & Co., Inc. Mobil Corp. Monsanto Co. Motorola, Inc. Newel1 Co.
Outcome in Cut 3 Eliminated, criteria 3,6 Eliminated, criterion 6 Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criterion 6 Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criterion 8 Eliminated, criterion 10 Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criteria 5, 11 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criterion 6 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criterion 3 Eliminated, criterion 6 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criteria 3, 6 Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criterion 1 Eliminated, criteria 6, 7 Eliminated, criterion 6 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criteria 3,6 Eliminated, criterion 3 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criteria 3, 6 Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criteria 3, 6 Eliminated, criteria 3, 6 Eliminated, criteria 3, 6 Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criterion 10 Eliminated, criterion 1 Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criteria 4, 5 Eliminated, criterion 1 Eliminated, criteria 3, 6 Appendix 1.A Companies Admitted i n Gut 2 Outcome in Cut 3 Eliminated, criteria 1,7 Eliminated, criterion 5 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criteria 1, 7 Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criterion 8 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criterion 1 Eliminated, criterion 2 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criteria 2, 5 Eliminated, criteria 1, 3 Eliminated, criterion 6 Eliminated, criterion 8 Eliminated, criteria 3,6 Eliminated, criteria 3,6 Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criterion 2 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criterion 7 Eliminated, criteria 3,6 Eliminated, criteria 3,6 Eliminated, criterion 1 Eliminated, criterion 3 Eliminated, criterion 8 Eliminated, criteria 3,6 Eliminated, criterion 6 Eliminated, criteria 3,6 Eliminated, criterion 8 Eliminated, criteria 2,6 Eliminated, criteria 1, 3 Eliminated, criterion 6 Eliminated, criterion 2 Eliminated, criterion 6 Eliminated, criterion 1 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criterion 9 Eliminated, criterion 6, 7 Accepted into Cut 4 analysis Eliminated, criterion 7 Nike, Inc. Norwest Corp. Nucor Corp. Olsten Corp. Owens-Corning PACCAR, Inc. Pacificare Health Systems Pepsico, Inc. Pfizer, Inc. Phelps Dodge Corp. Philip Morris Companies, Inc. Pitney Bowes, Inc. Procter & Gamble Co. Progressive Corp. Raytheon Co. Reebok Republic New York Rockwell International Corp. SCI Systems, Inc. SAFECO Corp. Sara Lee Corp. Schering-Plough Corp. ServiceMaster Co. Shaw Industries, Inc. Sonoco Products Co. Southwest Airlines Co. State Street Boston Corp. SunTrust Banks SYSCO Corp. Tandy Corp. Tele-Communications, Inc. Turner Broadcasting Tyco International, Ltd. Tyson Foods, Inc. Union Carbide Corp. U.S. Bancorp VF Corp. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. Walgreens Co. Walt Disney Warner-Lambert Co. Wells Fargo & Co. Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc.
Sara Lee, Heinz, Hershey, Kellogg, CPC, and General Mills demonstrated a dramatic upward shift relative to the general stock market in about 1980, but none of these companies demonstrated a shift relative to the food industry.
Coca-Cola and Pepsico demonstrated a dramatic upward shift relative to the general stock market in about 1960 and again in 1980, but neither demonstrated a shift relative to the beverage industry.
(Note: At the time of initial selection into the study, three of the companies did not yet have a full fifteen years of cumulative stock data-Circuit City, Fannie Mae, and Wells Fargo.
We performed a systematic and methodical collection and scoring of all obvious comparison candidates for each good-to-great company, using the following six criteria.
Business Fit: At the time of transition, the comparison candidate had similar products and services as the good-to-great company.
The following table shows the comparison candidates for each good-togreat company with their average score across the six criteria.
Abbott Up john Richardson-Merrill G. D. Searle & Co Sterling Drugs Schering-Plough Bristol-Meyers Norwich Parke-Davis SmithKline Beecham Pfizer Warner-Lambert Appendix 1.B Silo Tandy Best Buy Fannie Mae Great Western Financial Corp. Sallie Mae Freddie Mac H. F. Ahmanson & Co. Household International Continental Bancorp First Charter Gillette Warner-Lambert Avon Procter & Gamble Unilever International Flavors & Fragrances Revlon The Clorox Company Colgate-Palmolive Cheeseborough-Ponds Bic Alberto-Culver American Safety Razor Purex Corporation Faberg6 Appendix l.B - - - _.
_ - - -KimberlkClark - -- - - Scott Paper Company* T h e Mead Corporation Crown Zellerbach St. Regis Paper Company International Paper Union Camp Corporation Georgia-Pacifi& T h e Westvaco Corporation "Scott Paper was selected due to being a more direct competitor as the transition unfolded.
Jewel Albertson's Food Fair Grand Union Appendix 1.B Bethlehem Steel Corporation 3.00 Inland Steel Industries, Inc." 3.00 USX 2.92 National Steel Corporation 2.60 Florida Steel 2.50 Northwestern Steel and Wire Co. 2.40 The Interlake Corporation 2.00 Allegheny Teledyne- 1.83 Republic Steel Corporation 1.75 Lykes Corporation 1.60 Wheeling 1.50 "Inland scores higher only in the category of age fit.
J. Reynolds Tobacco American Tobacco Lorillard Industries Addressograph-Multigraph Burroughs (now Unisys) NCR IBM Control Data Appendix l.B Eckerd Revco D.S., Inc. Rite Aid Corporation Wells Fargo Bank of America First Chicago NationsBank Mellon Continental Illinois Bank of Boston First Interstate Norwest First Pennsylvania Interfirst - - *,.
p $ " %< 5; " " j 1; UNSUSTAINEU COMPARISONS Unsustained Comparison Number of Years of Rise* Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to Market during the Years of Rise Burroughs 10.08 13.76 0.21 Chrysler 5.67 10.54 0.69 Harris 6.42 6.63 0.16 Hasbro 6.33 35.00 0.63 10.83 6.97 0.31: Teledyne 9.42 17.95 0.22 Median 7.92 12.15 0.26 Unsustained Average 8.12 5 15.14 0.37 Rubbermaid Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to Market during the Next Ten Years t Good-to-Great Average over t h e analogous period * This is the number of years from the moment of upward transition to the peak of the rise, when the unsustained comparison begins to decline again relative to the market.
t The data for Rubbermaid goes 7.17 years after the peak, at which point the company is acquired.
For Wells Fargo, we use the last cell prior to the Norwest merger in 1998 (10130188).
All major articles published on the company over its entire history, from broadburces such as Forbes, Fortune, Business Week, the Wall Street fournal, Nation's Business, the New York Times, U.S. News, the New Republic, Harvard Business Review, and the Economist and from selected articles from industry- or topic-specific sources.
Materials obtained directly from the companies, especially books, articles, speeches by executives, internally produced publications, annual reports, and other company documents.
4. Business school case studies and industry analyses.
5. Business and industry reference materials, such as the Biographical Dictionary of American Business Leaders, the International Directory of Company Histories, Hoover's Handbook of Companies, Development of American Industries, and similar sources.
Coding Category 3 -Business Strategy, Strategic Process: Primary elements of the company's strategy.
Includes significant mergers and acquisitions.
I I I Coding Category 4-Markets, Competitors, and Environment: Significant aspects of the company's competitive and external environment-primary competitors, significant competitor activities, major market shifts, dramatic national or international events, government regulations, industry structural issues, dramatic technology changes, and related items.
Coding Category 5-Leadership: Leadership of the firm-key executives, CEOs, presidents, board members.
Interesting data on leadership succession, leadership style, and so on.
Coding Category 8- Use of Technology: How the company used technology: information technology, state-of-the-art processes and equipment, advanced job configurations, and related items.
Coding Category 10A (for Direct Comparisons Only) -ChangelTransition Activities during Transition Era of Corresponding Good-to-Great Company: Major attempts to change the company, to stimulate a transition, during the ten years prior and ten years after the transition date in the corresponding good-to-great company.
Appendix 1.D Coding Category 10B (for Unsustained Comparisons Only) -Attempted Transition Era: For the ten years leading up to and then during the "attempted transition era," major changeltransition initiatives and supporting activities undertaken by the company.
COMPANY AND N U M B E R OF I N T E R V I E W S CONDUCTED Abbott Circuit City Fannie Mae Gillette Kimberly-Clark Kroger Nucor Philip Morris Pitney Bowes Walgreens Wells Fargo Total Interview Questions Could you briefly give an overview of your relationship to the company-years involved and primary responsibilities held?
Appendix l.D Did the company make a conscious decision to initiate a major change or transition during this time fiame?
How did the company get commitment and alignment with its decisions?
How did the company manage the short-term pressures of Wall Street while ,making long-term changes and investments for the future?
Many companies undertake change programs and initiatives, yet their efforts do not produce lasting results.
Acquisitions and Divestitures This analysis unit sought to understand the role of acquisitions and divestments in the transition from good to great.
What is the quantitative difference in acquisitions and divestments, if any, between the pretransition and posttransition eras for the good-to-great companies?
How do the good-to-great companies differ in acquisitions and divestments from the dire$ comparisons?
How do the good-to-great companies differ in acquisitions and divestments from the unsustained comparisons?
List of acquisitions made during the year and their financial attributes.
Total number of acquisitions made during the year.
Total combined size of all acquisitions made during the year.
In addition, this analysis looked at the qualitative aspects of acquisitions and divestitures, examining questions such as: 1.
Overall strategy of acquisitions.
Overall strategy of integrating acquisitions.
For each of these industries, use the total returns from the transition year of the corresponding company to 1995 to determine the percentage change in total returns for a period from the transition year to 1995.
'Executive Churn Analysis This analysis unit looked at the extent to which the executive teams changed in the companies during crucial points in their history.
Using Moody's Company Information Reports, we calculated churn in the good-to-great companies versus comparison companies: Average percent of departures over pretransition decade.
What is the quantitative difference in executive churn and/or continuity, if any, between the pretransition and posttransition eras for the good-to-great companies?
How do the good-to-great companies differ in executive churn and/or continuity from the direct comparisons?
How do the good-to-great companies differ in executive churn and/or continuity from the unsustained comparisons?
Executive Compensation This unit examined executive compensation across the companies in our study.
CEO's total cash compensation as a percent of net worth at transition year.
Difference between CEO's salary + bonus and average of top four executives' salary + bonus as a percent of net worth at transition year and at transition year + 10 years.
Top four executives' total cash compensation as a percent of net worth at transition year.
Top four executives' salary + bonus as a percent of net worth at transition year.
Difference between CEO's and average of top four executives' salary bonus.
Difference between CEO's and average of top four executives' salary bonus as a percent of sales.
Difference between CEO's and average of top four executives' salary bonus as a percent of net income.
CEO's total cash compensation as a percent of net income at transition year.
Value of stocks granted per year to top four executives as a percent of sales at transition year.
Value of stocks granted per year to top four executives as a percent of assets at transition year.
Value of stocks granted per year to top four executives as a percent of net worth at transition year.
Top four executives' salary + bonus as a percent of sales at transition year + 10 years.
What is the quantitative difference in executive compensation, if any, between the pretransition and posttransition eras for the good-to-great companies?
How do the good-to-great companies differ in executive compensation from the direct comparisons?
How do the good-to-great companies differ in executive compensation from the unsustained comparisons?
In this unit, we sought to examine the good-to-great companies, the direct comparisons, and the unsustained comparisons for evidence of layoffs as a significant conscious tactic in an attempt to improve company performance.
Evidence of layoffs as a significant tactic in an attempt to improve company performance during the ten years prior and ten years after the date of transition.
If layoffs did occur, then calculate the number of people laid off, nominally and as a percent of the total workforce.
The extent of executive ownership.
Technology Analysis This unit examined the role of technology, drawing largely upon executive interviews and written source materials: 1.
Pioneering applications of technology.
Timing of technology.
Role of technology in decline of comparison companies.
They included: The use of bold corporate moves Evolutionary versus revolutionary corporate process Executive class versus egalitarianism Causes of decline in once-great comparison companies Three-circle analysis and fit with core values and purpose Appendix 1.D Length of buildup period before breakthrough Timing of Hedgehog Concept with breakthrough date Core business versus Hedgehog Concept analysis Succession analysis and success rates of successors Role of leadership in the decline of once-great comparison companies 1% ,L2 1"r i $i fe P* .j I N S I D E V E R S U S O U T S I D E CEO ANALYSIS The following tables show the total number of inside versus outside CEOs within each company.
Good-to-Great Companies Number of CEOs Number of Outsiders Percent of Outsiders Abbott 0% Circuit City 0% Fannie Mae 50% Gillette 0% Kimberly-Clark 0% Kroger 0% Nucor 0% Philip Morris 0% Pitney Bowes 0% Walgreens 0% Wells Fargo 0% Total Appendix 2.A Direct Comparison Companies Up john Number of CEOs Number of Outsiders Percent of Outsiders 33% Silo 67% Great Western 0% Warner-Lambert 20% Scott Paper 20% A&P 29% Bethlehem Steel 0% R. J. Reynolds 33% Addressograph 70% Eckerd 0% Bank of America 0% Number of CEOs Number of Outsiders Percent of Outsiders Burroughs 33% Chrysler 75% Harris 0% Hasbro 0% Rubbermaid 25% Teledyne 0% Total Unsustained Comparison Companies Total Total Comparison Set 30.77% i I % Appendix 2.A SUMMARY ANALYSIS Total Number of CEOs Total Number of Outsiders Percent of Outsiders Ratio of Comparison to Good-to-Great Good-to-Great Companies 4.76% Direct Comparison Companies 30.77% 6.46 Unsustained Comparison Companies 24.00% 5.04 Total Comparison Set 28.89% 6.07 Number of Companies Good-to-Great Companies Direct Comparison Companies Unsustained Comparison Companies Total Comparison Set Number of Companies That Hired an Outside CEO Percent of Companies Ratio of That Hired Comparison to Outside CEO Good-to-Great 9.09% I N D U S T R Y ANALYSIS R A N K I N G S We compared each good-to-great company's industry relative to all other industries that appeared in the Standard 6 Poor's Analyst's Handbook for a period from the transition year to 1995.
For each of these industries, use the total returns from the transition year of the corresponding company to 1995, to determine the percentage change in total returns for a period from the transition year to 1995.
I N D U S T R Y P E R F O R M A N C E F R O M T R A N S I T I O N Y E A R TO 1 9 9 5 , C O R R E S P O N O I N G TO E A C H C O M P A N Y - Company Years of Calculation Number of Industries Ranked Industry That Rest Reflects Company Rank of That Industry Abbott 1974-1995 Medical products 40% Circuit City 1982-1995 Retail specialty 21% Fannie Mae 1984-1995 S&L* 77% Gillette 1980-1995 Cosmetics 25% Kimberly-Clark 1972-1995 Household products 28% Kroger 1973-1995 Retail food chain 19% Nucor 1975-1995 Steel 99% Percentile of Industry Appendix 5.A Company Years of Calculation Number of Industries Ranked Industry That Best Reflects Company Rank of That Industry Philip Morris 1972-1995' Tobacco 4% Pitney Bowes 1974-1995 Computer systems 97% Walgreens 1975-1995 Retail drugstore 18% Wells Fargo 1983-1995 Major regional banks 76% Percentile of Industry 'The savings and loan industry was deemed the best proxy for Fannie Mae.
Addressograph Went into a Chicken Little "The Sky Is Falling" panic about the decline of its core business.
Tried a quixotic "total corporate rejuvenation," throwing itself into the office automation field against IBM, Xerox, and Kodak.
Fell behind in ATMs and technology, then threw itself into an expensive catchwup program.
Tried to "pull off its own version of Mao's Cultural Revolution" by hiring corporate change consultants who led "corporate encounter groups" and tried to institute a "rah-rah approach to management."
Lurched after Charles Schwab; culture clash erupted, and later sold it back.
Lurched after Security Pacific, trying to emulate Wells Fargo's Crocker merger; acquisition failed, creating a multibillion-dollar write-off.?
Appendix 8.A Bethlehem Steel Vacillated back and forth: diversification, then focus on steel, then back to diversification, then back to steel.
Fell behind in technology and modernization, then launched a crash program to catch up.
Meanwhile, foreign competitors and Nucor snuck in from below to devour market share.4 Eckerd Fell into doom loop by making unrelated acquisitions, in search of growth, but without any guiding Hedgehog Concept.
In the biggest disaster, it bought American Home Video; lost $31 million, then sold it off to Tandy at $72 million below book value.
Eckerd never fully recovered, got bought in a leveraged buyout, and later sold out to J. C. Penney.5 Great Western Financial Inconsistency of program.
Held together by the personal vision of the CEO, but when he retired, Great Western stumbled under its unwieldy, incoherent model, fell into reactionary restructuring, and sold out to Washington MutuaL6 R. J. Reynolds As RJR began to slip and found itself under siege from antitobacco forces, it reacted by throwing itself into ill-considered acquisitions, such as Sea-Land.
Later, after losing its number one spot to Philip Morris, RJR threw itself into a leveraged buyout, designed primarily to enrich management rather than build the company.7 Scott Paper Fell into reactionary diversification as its core business came under attack from Procter & Gamble and Kimberly-Clark.
With fanfare, Scott undertook radical change efforts in the late 1980s, but never answered the question, What Appendix 8.A can we be the best in the world at?
Whereas Circuit City would go into a region, build a distribution center, and fill every surrounding town with a store, Silo irrationally jumped from city to city, one store here, another store there, creating a totally unsystematic hodgepodge agglomeration of stores, with no regional economies of scale.
Silo acquired by Cyclops, then Cyclops acquired by Dixons.
Management fired by new owner^.^ Upjohn Fell into a pattern of selling the future ("The future never looked brighter ') and hyping the potential of new products.
Upjohn stock became volatile and speculative-up and down, up and down again-as it sold the sizzle, but never delivered the steak.
Later, like a gambler at Las Vegas, it threw its chips on "savior products," such as Rogaine baldness cure.
Persistent product problems, with Halcion and others, exacerbated the swings.
Eventually succumbed to restructuring disease and merged with Pharmacia.l0 Warner-Lambert Lurched back and forth, from consumer products to pharmaceuticals and health care, then back again, then both at the same time, then back to one, then back to the other.
Tried to ignite breakthrough with bold acquisitions, but failed and took hundreds of millions in write-offs.
In the end, after years of inconsistent programs, it lurched into the arms of Pfizer, ending its turbulent existence as an independent company.ll UNSUSTAINED COMPARISONS Burroughs During its rise, Burroughs' C E O , "a brilliant but abusive man," led a sweeping total reengineering.
Another massive reorganization, 400 executives leave in one purge.
'* Chrysler Five years of stellar performance, then decline back into crisis.
Revived in second turnaround in 1990s, but eventually sold out to Daimler.I3 Harris Rose with a C E O who had a Hedgehog Concept in his head, and who produced an initial flywheel effect.
But h e did not instill this concept into his executive team.
Later, when h e retired, executives replaced the Hedgehog Concept with a growth mantra.
Harris lurched off into office automation, which proved to be a disaster, and then into a series of unrelated acquisitions.
T h e flywheel came to a grinding halt.14 Hasbro Hasbro is the one comparison company that nearly got it all right.
It built spectacular results by consistently pursuing the Hedgehog Concept of revitalizing classic toy brands, like G.I.
T h e C E O reacted with restructuring and eventually hired an outsider to rebuild momentum.I5 Rubbermaid If there ever was a company that skipped the buildup stage, it's Rubbermaid.
When the C E O retired, it became clear that he was the primary force in the flywheel, not a strong team guided by a systematic Hedgehog Concept.
Rubbermaid fell from Fortune's number one most admired to being acquired by Newell, in just five years.16 Appendix 8.A Teledyne Teledyne rose and fell with the genius of one man, Henry Singleton, known as the Sphinx.
The company's Hedgehog Concept was, in essence: Follow Henry's brain.
Singleton engineered over a hundred acquisitions, in fields from electronics to exotic metals.
Teledyne fell into a downward spiral, eventually merging with Allegheny."
?%$3 B' ;ag $; , 34 8 rg S U M M A R Y O F A C Q U I S I T I O N ANALYSIS GOOD-TO-GREAT COMPANIES V E R S U S COMPARlSON COMPANIES* Company Total Number of Acquisitions during Era Studied Total Number of Oivestitures during Era Studied Overall Success Rate of Acquisitions Strategy Abbott +2 Upjohn NA Circuit City +3 Silo -1 Fannie Mae +3 Great Western -1 Gillette +3 Warner-Lambert -1 Scott Paper -2 Kroger +2 Nucor +3 Bethlehem Steel -3 Philip Morris +1 R. J. Reynolds -3 Pitney Bowes +1 Addressograph -3 Walgreens +3 Eckerd -1 Appendix 8.B Company Total Number of Acquisitions during Era Studied Wells Fargo Bank of America Burroughs Chrysler Harris Hasbro Rubbermaid Teledyne Total Number of Divestitures during Era Studied Overall Success Rate of Acquisitions Strategy "To construct this table, we determined the total number of acquisitions conducted by each company from the pretransition decade to 1998.
In the case of Upjohn, we could not obtain enough research data to conduct a thorough analysis and thus did not assign a score to the company.
Stock return calculations in this book were determined using data from the University of Chicago Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).
General Stock Market (also called the General Market or just the Market): NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ value-weighted return, which consists of the combined market value of all companies traded on these exchanges (including dividends reinvested) weighted by the capitalization of the company divided by the capitalization of the market.
Using University of Chicago Center for Research in Security Prices data, cumulative returns were calculated from December 31, 1984, to December 31, 1999, for G E and the general market, all dividends reinvested, adjusted for stock splits.
Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscript by William W. Wicks, Shared Values: A History of Kimberly-Clark (Connecticut: Greenwich Publishing Group, 1997), 101.
"Darwin Smith May Have Done Too Good a Job," Business Week, August 1, 1988, 57; "Rae Takes On the Paper Industry's Tough Lone Wolf," Globe and Mail, July 20, 1991; "Former CEO of K-C Dies," Dallas Morning News, December 27, 1995, 1D.
"Darwin Smith May Have Done Too Good a Job," Business Week, August 1, 1988, 57.
"Darwin Smith May Have Done Too Good a Job," Business Week, August 1, 1988, 57; "Kimberly-Clark Bets, Wins on Innovation," Wall Street \ournal, November 22, 1991, A5; "Darwin E. Smith, 69, Executive Who Remade a Paper Company," New York Times, December 28, 1995, B9; Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscript by William W. Wicks, Shared Values: A History of Kimberly-Clark (Connecticut: Greenwich Publishing Group, 1997), 101.
Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscript by William W. Wicks, Shared Values: A History of Kimberly-Clark (Connecticut: Greenwich Publishing Group, 1997), 112.
9. International Directory of Company Histories, vol.
3 (Chicago: St. James Press, 1991), 40; "Kimberly-Clark-Aiming for the Consumer," Financial World, April 1, 1970, 15.
Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscript by William W. Wicks, Shared Values: A History of Kimberly-Clark (Connecticut: Green- .
Notes wich Publishing Group, 1997), 106, 112; "Darwin E. Smith, 69, Executive Who Remade a Paper Company," New York Times, December 28, 1995, B9; "Former CEO of K-C Dies," Dallas Morning News, December 27, 1995, 1D; Research Interview #5-E, page 6; "Paper Tiger: How Kimberly-Clark Wraps Its Bottom Line in Disposable Huggies," Wall Street Journal, July 23, 1987, 1.
"The Battle of the Bottoms," Forbes, March 24, 1997,98.
"The Battle of the Bottoms," Forbes, March 24, 1997,98.
Robert Spector, based on research and a manuscript by William W. Wicks, Shared Values: A History of Kimberly-Clark (Connecticut: Greenwich Publishing Group, 1997), 10.
Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge: Gillette's Journey to Global Leadership (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1998), 14.
Company "Chronology," Gillette corporate typescript, 1995; Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge: Gillette's Journey to Global Leadership (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1998), 198, 199; Rita RicardoCampbell, Resisting Hostile Takeovers: The Case of Gillette (Connecticut: Praeger Publishers, 1997), 153.
Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge: Gillette's Journey to Global Leadership (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1998), 159.
Rita Ricardo-Campbell, Resisting Hostile Takeovers: The Case of Gillette (Connecticut: Praeger Publishers, 1997).
Author conversation with Gillette CEO, summer 2000.
"We invested almost $1.5 billion in Sensor and Mach3.
Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge: Gillette's lourney to Global Leadership (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1998), 158.
Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge: Gillette's Journey to Global Leadership (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1998), 254.
"Iacocca's Last Stand," Fortune, April 20, 1992, 63.
"Sincere Tyranny," Forbes, January 28, 1985, 54.
"Managing: Leaders of Corporate Change," Fortune, December 14, 1992, 104.
"Chairman Quits Post," New York Times, November 17, 1992, D5; "Rubbermaid's Sad Succession Tale," New York Times, July 5, 1987, C 1.
"Is Rubbermaid Reacting Too Late?"
"Did C E O Dunlap Save Scott Paper-or Just Pretty It Up?
T h e Shredder," Business Week, January 15, 1996.
"Did C E O Dunlap Save Scott Paper-or Just Pretty It Up?
T h e Shredder," Business Week, January 15, 1996; "Chain Saw A1 to the Rescue?"
Forbes, August 26, 1996; "After the Fall," Across the Board, April 1996, 28-33; "Only the Paranoid Survive," Worth Online, October 1996; Albert J. Dunlap with Bob Andelman, Mean Business: How I Save Bad Companies and Make Good Companies Great (New York: Fireside, 1997), 20.
Albert J. Dunlap with Bob Andelman, Mean Business: How I Save Bad Companies and Make Good Companies Great (New York: Fireside, 1997), 132.
The cases where a charismatic C E O eventually became a liability for the company were Great Western, Warner-Lambert, Scott Paper, Bethlehem Steel, R. J. Reynolds, Addressograph-Multigraph, Eckerd, Bank of America, Burroughs, Chrysler, Rubbermaid, and Teledyne.
"President Iacocca," Wall Street Tournal, July 28, 1982, 1; "Iacocca Hands Over the Keys to Chrysler," Investor's Business Daily, January 4, 1993, 1.
"Iacocca Hands Over the Keys to Chrysler," Investor's Business Daily, January 4, 1993, 1.
"How Chrysler Filled Detroit's Biggest Shoes," Wall Street Tournal, September 7, 1994, B1.
"Why Certain Stocks," Wall Street TournaE, April 13, 1995, Al; "Chrysler's New Plan: Sell Cars," Fortune, June 26, 1995, 19.
"Will Success Spoil Chrysler?"
Fortune, January 10, 1994; "Company of the Year: Chrysler Has the Hot Cars.
More Important, It Has a Smart, Disciplined Management Team," Forbes, January 13, 1997, 82; "DaimlerBenz Will Acquire Chrysler in $36 Billion Deal That Will Reshape Industry," New York Times, May 7, 1998, A6.
Research Interview #1-A, page 3; Research Interview #1-G, page 35; "A Drugmaker's Return to Health," Business Week, April 26, 1976, 38; Herman Kogan, The Long White Line: The Story ofAbbott Laboratories (New York: Random House, 1963), 249.
The Upjohn Company, International Directory of Company Histories, 707; "The Medicine Men of Kalamazoo," Fortune, July 1959, 106.
University of Chicago Center for Research in Securities Prices data, all dividends reinvested and adjusted for stock splits.
Herman Kogan and Rick Kogan, Pharmacist to the Nation (Deerfield, Ill.: Walgreens Company, 1989), 236; Research Interview #lo-F, page 3.
University of Chicago Center for Research in Securities Prices data, all dividends reinvested and adjusted for stock splits.
Jeffrey L. Rodengen, The Legend of the Nucor Corporation (Fort Lauderdale, Fla.: Write Stuff Enterprises, 1997), 7 1.
Gordon McKibben, Cutting Edge: Gillette's Journey to Global Leaders h i (Boston: ~ Harvard Business School Press, 1998), 78-79.
Research Interview #I 1-H, page 5; "A Banker Even Keynes Might Love," Forbes, July 2, 1984,40.
Gary Hector, Breaking the Bank: The Decline of BankAmerica (Little, Brown & Company, 1988), 73, 143; "Big Quarterly Deficit Stuns BankAmerica," Wall Street Journal, July 18, 1985, Al; "Autocrat Tom Clausen," Wall Street Journal, October 17, 1986, 1; further confirmed in conversation between Jim Collins and two former Bank of America executives, July-August 2000.
"Tuning In," Forbes, April 13, 1981, 96; "Video Follies," Forbes, November 5, 1984,43; Research Interview #lo-F, page 10.
"The Forbes Four Hundred," Forbes, October 17, 1994, 200. International Directory ofcompany Histories, vol.
10 (Chicago: St. James Press, 1995), 520. International Directory of Company Histories, vol.
10 (Chicago: St. James Press, 1995); "Making Big Waves with Small Fish," Business Week, December 30, 1967, 36.
"The Sphinx Speaks," Forbes, February 20, 1978, 33.
"The Singular Henry Singleton," Forbes, July 9, 1979,45.
"Nucor Gets Loan," Wall Street Journal, March 3, 1972, 11; "Nucor's Big-Buck Incentives," Business Week, September 21, 1981,42.
"How Nucor Crawfordsville Works," Iron Age New Steel, December 1995,36-52.
"Nucor Gets Loan," Wall Street Journal, March 3, 1972, B l l .
"Bold Banker: Wells Fargo Takeover of Crocker Is Yielding Profit but Some Pain," Wall Street Journal, August 5, 1986, Al.
"Bold Banker: Wells Fargo Takeover of Crocker Is Yielding Profit but Some Pain," Wall Street Journal, August 5, 1986, Al.
Research Interview #I 1-G, page 10; Research Interview #I 1-A, page 29; Research Interview #I 1-F, page 11; "Bold Banker: Wells Fargo Takeover 38.
