ONE While I Was Sleeping Your Highnesses, as Catholic Christians, and princes who love and promote the holy Christian faith, and are enemies of the doctrine of Mahomet, and of all idolatry and heresy, determined to send me, Christopher Columbus, to the above-mentioned countries of India, to see the said princes, people, and territo ries, and to learn their disposition and the proper method of converting them to our holy faith; and furthermore directed that I should not proceed by land to the East, as is customary, but by a Westerly route, in which direction we have hith erto no certain evidence that anyone has gone.
Entry from the journal of Christopher Columbus on his voyage of 1492 N o one ever gave me directions like this on a golf course before: "Aim at either Microsoft or IBM."
I was standing on the first tee at the KGA Golf Club in downtown Bangalore, in southern India, when my playing partner pointed at two shiny glass-and-steel buildings off in the distance, just behind the first green.
The Goldman Sachs building wasn't done yet; otherwise he could have pointed that out as well and made it a threesome.
HP and Texas Instruments had their of fices on the back nine, along the tenth hole.
That wasn't all.
The tee markers were from Epson, the printer company, and one of our caddies was wearing a hat from 3M.
Outside, some of the traffic signs were also sponsored by Texas Instruments, and the Pizza Hut billboard on the way over showed a steaming pizza, under the headline "Gigabites of Taste!"
THE WORLD IS FLAT No, this definitely wasn't Kansas.
It didn't even seem like India.
Was this the New World, the Old World, or the Next World?
I had come to Bangalore, India's Silicon Valley, on my own Columbus-like journey of exploration.
Columbus sailed with the Nina, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria in an effort to discover a shorter, more di rect route to India by heading west, across the Atlantic, on what he pre sumed to be an open sea route to the East Indies rather than going south and east around Africa, as Portuguese explorers of his day were try ing to do.
India and the magical Spice Islands of the East were famed at the time for their gold, pearls, gems, and silka source of untold riches.
Finding this shortcut by sea to India, at a time when the Muslim powers of the day had blocked the overland routes from Europe, was a way for both Columbus and the Spanish monarchy to become wealthy and pow erful.
When Columbus set sail, he apparently assumed the earth was round, which was why he was convinced that he could get to India by going west.
He miscalculated the distance, though.
He thought the earth was a smaller sphere than it is.
He also did not anticipate run ning into a landmass before he reached the East Indies.
Nevertheless, he called the aboriginal peoples he encountered in the new world "Indians."
Returning home, though, Columbus was able to tell his pa trons, King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella, that although he never did find India, he could confirm that the world was indeed round.
I set out for India by going due east, via Frankfurt.
I had Lufthansa business class.
I knew exactly which direction I was going thanks to the GPS map displayed on the screen that popped out of the armrest of my airline seat.
I landed safely and on schedule.
I too encountered people called Indians.
I too was searching for India's riches.
Columbus was searching for hardwareprecious metals, silk, and spicesthe sources of wealth in his day.
I was searching for software, brainpower, complex al gorithms, knowledge workers, call centers, transmission protocols, break throughs in optical engineeringthe sources of wealth in our day.
Columbus was happy to make the Indians he met his slaves, a pool of free manual labor.
I just wanted to understand why the Indians I met were taking our work, why they had become such an important pool for the outsourcing of service and information technology work from WHILE I WAS SLEEPING America and other industrialized countries.
Columbus had more than one hundred men on his three ships; I had a small crew from the Discovery Times channel that fit comfortably into two banged-up vans, with Indian drivers who drove barefoot.
When I set sail, so to speak, I too assumed that the world was round, but what I encountered in the real India profoundly shook my faith in that notion.
Columbus accidentally ran into America but thought he had discovered part of India.
I actually found India and thought many of the people I met there were Ameri cans.
Some had actually taken American names, and others were doing great imitations of American accents at call centers and American busi ness techniques at software labs.
Columbus reported to his king and queen that the world was round, and he went down in history as the man who first made this discovery.
I returned home and shared my discovery only with my wife, and only in a whisper.
"Honey," I confided, "I think the world is flat."
H ow did I come to this conclusion?
I guess you could say it all started in Nandan Nilekani's conference room at Infosys Technologies Limited.
Infosys is one of the jewels of the Indian information technology world, and Nilekani, the company's CEO, is one of the most thoughtful and respected captains of Indian industry.
I drove with the Discovery Times crew out to the Infosys campus, about forty minutes from the heart of Bangalore, to tour the facility and interview Nilekani.
The Infosys campus is reached by a pockmarked road, with sacred cows, horse-drawn carts, and motorized rickshaws all jostling alongside our vans.
Once you enter the gates of Infosys, though, you are in a different world.
A massive resort-size swimming pool nestles amid boulders and manicured lawns, adjacent to a huge putting green.
There are multiple restaurants and a fabulous health club.
Glass-and-steel buildings seem to sprout up like weeds each week.
In some of those buildings, Infosys employees are writing specific software pro grams for American or European companies; in others, they are running the back rooms of major American- and European-based multinationals everything from computer maintenance to specific research projects to THE WORLD IS FLAT answering customer calls routed there from all over the world.
Security is tight, cameras monitor the doors, and if you are working for Ameri can Express, you cannot get into the building that is managing services and research for General Electric.
Young Indian engineers, men and women, walk briskly from building to building, dangling ID badges.
One looked like he could do my taxes.
Another looked like she could take my computer apart.
And a third looked like she designed it!
After sitting for an interview, Nilekani gave our T V crew a tour of Infosys's global conferencing centerground zero of the Indian out sourcing industry.
It was a cavernous wood-paneled room that looked like a tiered classroom from an Ivy League law school.
On one end was a massive wall-size screen and overhead there were cameras in the ceil ing for teleconferencing.
"So this is our conference room, probably the largest screen in Asiathis is forty digital screens [put together]," Nilekani explained proudly, pointing to the biggest flat-screen T V I had ever seen.
Infosys, he said, can hold a virtual meeting of the key players from its entire global supply chain for any project at any time on that supersize screen.
So their American designers could be on the screen speaking with their Indian software writers and their Asian manufactur ers all at once.
"We could be sitting here, somebody from New York, London, Boston, San Francisco, all live.
And maybe the implementation is in Singapore, so the Singapore person could also be live here .
That's globalization," said Nilekani.
Above the screen there were eight clocks that pretty well summed up the Infosys workday: 24/7/365.
The clocks were labeled US West, US East, GMT, India, Singapore, Hong Kong, Japan, Australia.
"Outsourcing is just one dimension of a much more fundamental thing happening today in the world," Nilekani explained.
"What hap pened over the last [few] years is that there was a massive investment in technology, especially in the bubble era, when hundreds of millions of dollars were invested in putting broadband connectivity around the world, undersea cables, all those things."
At the same time, he added, computers became cheaper and dispersed all over the world, and there was an explosion of softwaree-mail, search engines like Google, and proprietary software that can chop up any piece of work and send one WHILE I WAS SLEEPING part to Boston, one part to Bangalore, and one part to Beijing, making it easy for anyone to do remote development.
When all of these things sud denly came together around 2000, added Nilekani, they "created a plat form where intellectual work, intellectual capital, could be delivered from anywhere.
It could be disaggregated, delivered, distributed, pro duced, and put back together againand this gave a whole new degree of freedom to the way we do work, especially work of an intellectual na ture .
And what you are seeing in Bangalore today is really the culmi nation of all these things coming together."
We were sitting on the couch outside Nilekani's office, waiting for the TV crew to set up its cameras.
At one point, summing up the implica tions of all this, Nilekani uttered a phrase that rang in my ear.
He said to me, "Tom, the playing field is being leveled."
He meant that countries like India are now able to compete for global knowledge work as never beforeand that America had better get ready for this.
America was go ing to be challenged, but, he insisted, the challenge would be good for America because we are always at our best when we are being chal lenged.
As I left the Infosys campus that evening and bounced along the road back to Bangalore, I kept chewing on that phrase: "The playing field is being leveled."
What Nandan is saying, I thought to myself, is that the playing field is being flattened .
Flattened?
Flattened?
I rolled that word around in my head for a while and then, in the chemical way that these things hap pen, it just popped out: My God, he's telling me the world is flat!
Here I was in Bangaloremore than five hundred years after Columbus sailed over the horizon, using the rudimentary navigational technologies of his day, and returned safely to prove definitively that the world was roundand one of India's smartest engineers, trained at his country's top technical institute and backed by the most modern tech nologies of his day, was essentially telling me that the world was flatas flat as that screen on which he can host a meeting of his whole global supply chain.
Even more interesting, he was citing this development as a good thing, as a new milestone in human progress and a great opportu nity for India and the worldthe fact that we had made our world flat!
In the back of that van, I scribbled down four words in my notebook: THE WORLD IS FLAT "The world is flat."
As soon as I wrote them, I realized that this was the underlying message of everything that I had seen and heard in Bangalore in two weeks of filming.
The global competitive playing field was being leveled.
The world was being flattened.
As I came to this realization, I was filled with both excitement and dread.
The journalist in me was excited at having found a framework to better understand the morning headlines and to explain what was hap pening in the world today.
Clearly Nandan was right: It is now possible for more people than ever to collaborate and compete in real time with more other people on more different kinds of work from more different corners of the planet and on a more equal footing than at any previous time in the history of the worldusing computers, e-mail, fiber-optic networks, teleconferencing, and dynamic new software.
That was what I discovered on my journey to India and beyond.
And that is what this book is about.
When you start to think of the world as flat, or at least in the process of flattening, a lot of things make sense in ways they did not before.
But I was also excited personally, because what the flattening of the world means is that we are now connecting all the knowledge centers on the planet together into a single global network, whichif politics and terrorism do not get in the waycould usher in an amazing era of prosperity, innovation, and collaboration, by companies, communities, and individuals.
But contemplating the flat world also left me filled with dread, professional and personal.
My personal dread derived from the obvious fact that its not only the software writers and computer geeks who get empowered to collaborate on work in a flat world.
It's also alQaeda and other terrorist networks.
The playing field is not being leveled only in ways that draw in and superempower a whole new group of in novators.
It's being leveled in a way that draws in and superempowers a whole new group of angry, frustrated, and humiliated men and women.
Professionally, the recognition that the world was flat was unnerving because I realized that this flattening had been taking place while I was sleeping, and I had missed it.
I wasn't really sleeping, but I was otherwise engaged.
Before 9/11,1 was focused on tracking globalization and explor ing the tension between the "Lexus" forces of economic integration and the "Olive Tree" forces of identity and nationalismhence my 1999 book, WHILE I WAS SLEEPING The Lexus and the Olive Tree.
But after 9/11, the olive tree wars became allconsuming for me.
I spent almost all my time traveling in the Arab and Muslim worlds.
During those years I lost the trail of globalization.
I found that trail again on my journey to Bangalore in February 2004.
Once I did, I realized that something really important had hap pened while I was fixated on the olive groves of Kabul and Baghdad.
Globalization had gone to a whole new level.
If you put The Lexus and the Olive Tree and this book together, the broad historical argument you end up with is that there have been three great eras of globaliza tion.
The first lasted from 1492when Columbus set sail, opening trade between the Old World and the New Worlduntil around 1800.
I would call this era Globalization 1.0.
It shrank the world from a size large to a size medium.
Globalization 1.0 was about countries and muscles.
That is, in Globalization 1.0, the key agent of change, the dy namic force driving the process of global integration, was how much brawnhow much muscle, how much horsepower, wind power, or, later, steam poweryour country had and how creatively you could de ploy it.
In this era, countries and governments (often inspired by religion or imperialism or a combination of both) led the way in breaking down walls and knitting the world together, driving global integration.
In Globalization 1.0, the primary questions were: Where does my country fit into global competition and opportunities?
How can I go global and collaborate with others through my country?
The second great era, Globalization 2.0, lasted roughly from 1800 to 2000, interrupted by the Great Depression and World Wars I and II.
This era shrank the world from a size medium to a size small.
In Global ization 2.0, the key agent of change, the dynamic force driving global integration, was multinational companies.
These multinationals went global for markets and labor, spearheaded first by the expansion of the Dutch and English joint-stock companies and the Industrial Revolution.
In the first half of this era, global integration was powered by falling trans portation costs, thanks to the steam engine and the railroad, and in the second half by falling telecommunication coststhanks to the diffusion of the telegraph, telephones, the PC, satellites, fiber-optic cable, and the early version of the World Wide Web.
It was during this era that we really THE WORLD IS FLAT saw the birth and maturation of a global economy, in the sense that there was enough movement of goods and information from continent to con tinent for there to be a global market, with global arbitrage in products and labor.
The dynamic forces behind this era of globalization were breakthroughs in hardwarefrom steamships and railroads in the be ginning to telephones and mainframe computers toward the end.
And the big questions in this era were: Where does my company fit into the global economy?
How does it take advantage of the opportunities?
How can I go global and collaborate with others through my company?
The Lexus and the Olive Tree was primarily about the climax of this era, an era when the walls started falling all around the world, and integration and the backlash to itwent to a whole new level.
But even as the walls fell, there were still a lot of barriers to seamless global integration.
Remember, when Bill Clinton was elected president in 1992, virtually no one outside of government and the academy had e-mail, and when I was writing The Lexus and the Olive Tree in 1998, the Internet and e-commerce were just taking off.
Well, they took offalong with a lot of other things that came to gether while I was sleeping.
And that is why I argue in this book that right around the year 2000 we entered a whole new era: Globalization 3.0.
Globalization 3.0 is shrinking the world from a size small to a size tiny and flattening the playing field at the same time.
And while the dy namic force in Globalization 1.0 was countries globalizing and the dy namic force in Globalization 2.0 was companies globalizing, the dynamic force in Globalization 3.0the force that gives it its unique characteris the newfound power for individuals to collaborate and compete globally.
And the phenomenon that is enabling, empowering, and enjoining individuals and small groups to go global so easily and so seamlessly is what I call the flat-world platform, which I describe in de tail in this book.
Just a hint: The flat-world platform is the product of a convergence of the personal computer (which allowed every individual suddenly to become the author of his or her own content in digital form) with fiber-optic cable (which suddenly allowed all those individ uals to access more and more digital content around the world for next to nothing) with the rise of work flow software (which enabled individ- WHILE I WAS SLEEPING uals all over the world to collaborate on that same digital content from anywhere, regardless of the distances between them).
No one antici pated this convergence.
It just happenedright around the year 2000.
And when it did, people all over the world started waking up and realiz ing that they had more power than ever to go global as individuals, they needed more than ever to think of themselves as individuals competing against other individuals all over the planet, and they had more oppor tunities to work with those other individuals, not just compete with them.
As a result, every person now must, and can, ask: Where do I as an individual fit into the global competition and opportunities of the day, and how can I, on my own, collaborate with others globally?
But Globalization 3.0 differs from the previous eras not only in how it is shrinking and flattening the world and in how it is empowering indi viduals.
It also is different in that Globalization 1.0 and 2.0 were driven primarily by European and American individuals and businesses.
Even though China actually had the biggest economy in the world in the eigh teenth century, it was Western countries, companies, and explorers who were doing most of the globalizing and shaping of the system.
But going forward, this will be less and less true.
Because it is flattening and shrink ing the world, Globalization 3.0 is going to be more and more driven not only by individuals but also by a much more diversenon-Western, nonwhitegroup of individuals.
Individuals from every corner of the flat world are being empowered.
Globalization 3.0 makes it possible for so many more people to plug in and play, and you are going to see every color of the human rainbow take part.
(While this empowerment of individuals to act globally is the most important new feature of Globalization 3.0, companieslarge and smallhave been newly empowered in this era as well.
I discuss both in detail later in the book.)
Needless to say, I had only the vaguest appreciation of all this as I left Nandan's office that day in Bangalore.
But as I sat contemplating these changes on the balcony of my hotel room that evening, I did know one thing: I wanted to drop everything and write a book that would enable me to understand how this flattening process happened and what its im plications might be for countries, companies, and individuals.
So I THE WORLD IS FLAT picked up the phone and called my wife, Ann, and told her, "I am going to write a book called The World Is Flat."
She was both amused and cu riouswell, maybe more amused than curious!
Eventually, I was able to bring her around, and I hope I will be able to do the same with you, dear reader.
Let me start by taking you back to the beginning of my journey to India, and other points east, and share with you some of the encounters that led me to conclude the world was no longer roundbut flat.
J err aithirth " J y " Rao was one of the first people I met in Bangalore, and I hadn't been with him for more than a few minutes at the Leela Palace hotel before he told me that he could handle my tax returns and any other accounting needs I hadfrom Bangalore.
No thanks, I de murred, I already have an accountant in Chicago.
Jerry just smiled.
He was too polite to say itthat he may already be my accountant, or rather my accountant's accountant, thanks to the explosion in the outsourcing of tax preparation.
"This is happening as we speak," said Rao, a native of Mumbai, for merly Bombay, whose Indian firm, MphasiS, has a team of Indian ac countants able to do outsourced accounting work from any state in America and the federal government.
"We have tied up with several small and medium-size CPA firms in America."
"You mean like my accountant?"
I asked.
'Yes, like your accountant," said Rao with a smile.
Rao's company has pioneered a work flow software program with a standardized format that makes the outsourcing of tax re turns cheap and easy.
The whole process starts, Jerry explained, with an accountant in the United States scanning my last year's tax returns, plus my W-2, W-4, 1099, bonuses, and stock statementseverythinginto a computer server, which is physically located in California or Texas.
"Now your accountant, if he is going to have your taxes done overseas, knows that you would prefer not to have your surname be known or your Social Security number known [to someone outside the country], so he can choose to suppress that information," said Rao.
"The accountants in India call up all the raw information directly from the server in America [using a password], and they complete your tax returns, with you re- WHILE I WAS SLEEPING maining anonymous.
All the data stays in the U.S. to comply with pri vacy regulations... We take data protection and privacy very seriously.
The accountant in India can see the data on his screen, but he cannot take a download of it or print it outour program does not allow it.
The most he could do would be to try to memorize it, if he had some ill in tention.
The accountants are not allowed to even take a paper and pen into the room when they are working on the returns."
I was intrigued at just how advanced this form of service outsourcing had become.
"We are doing several thousand returns," said Rao.
What's more, "Your CPA in America need not even be in their office.
They can be sitting on a beach in California and e-mail us and say, 'Jerry, you are really good at doing New York State returns, so you do Tom's returns.
And Sonia, you and your team in Delhi do the Washington and Florida returns.'
Sonia, by the way, is working out of her house in India, with no overhead [for the company to pay].
'And these others, they are really complicated, so I will do them myself.'
" In 2003, some 25,000 U.S. tax returns were done in India.
In 2004, the number was 100,000.
In 2005, it was roughly 400,000.
In a decade, you will assume that your accountant has outsourced the basic prepara tion of your tax returns if not more.
"How did you get into this?"
I asked Rao.
"My friend Jeroen Tas, a Dutchman, and I were both working in Cal ifornia for Citigroup," Rao explained.
"I was his boss and we were com ing back from New York one day together on a flight and I said that I was planning to quit and he said, 'So am I.'
We both said, 'Why don't we start our own business?'
So in 1997-98, we put together a business plan to provide high-end Internet solutions for big companies... Two years ago, though, I went to a technology convention in Las Vegas and was ap proached by some medium-size [American] accounting firms, and they said they could not afford to set up big tax outsourcing operations in India, but the big guys could, and [the medium guys] wanted to get ahead of them.
So we developed a software product called VTR Virtual Tax Roomto enable these medium-size accounting firms to easily outsource tax returns."
These midsize firms "are getting a more level playing field, which THE WORLD IS FLAT they were denied before/' said Jerry.
"Suddenly they can get access to the same advantages of scale that the bigger guys always had."
Is the message to Americans, "Mama, don't let your kids grow up to be accountants"?
I asked.
Not really, said Rao.
"What we have done is taken the grunt work.
You know what is needed to prepare a tax return?
Very little creative work.
This is what will move overseas."
"What will stay in America?"
I asked.
"The accountant who wants to stay in business in America will be the one who focuses on designing creative, complex strategies, like tax avoid ance or tax sheltering, managing customer relationships," he said.
"He or she will say to his clients, 'I am getting the grunt work done efficiently far away.
Now let's talk about how we manage your estate and what you are going to do about your kids.
Do you want to leave some money in your trusts?'
It means having the quality-time discussions with clients rather than running around like chickens with their heads cut off from February to April, and often filing for extensions into August, because they have not had the quality time with clients."
Judging from an essay in the journal Accounting Today (June 7, 2004), this does, indeed, seem to be the future.
L. Gary Boomer, a CPA and C E O of Boomer Consulting in Manhattan, Kansas, wrote, "This past [tax] season produced over 100,000 [outsourced] returns and has now expanded beyond individual returns to trusts, partnerships and cor porations .
The primary reason that the industry has been able to scale up as rapidly as it has over the past three years is due to the investment that these [foreign-based] companies have made in systems, processes and training."
There are about seventy thousand accounting grads in India each year, he added, many of whom go to work for local Indian firms starting at $100 a month.
With the help of high-speed communi cations, stringent training, and standardized forms, these young Indians can fairly rapidly be converted into basic Western accountants at a frac tion of the cost.
Some of the Indian accounting firms even go about mar keting themselves to American firms through teleconferencing and skip the travel.
Concluded Boomer, "The accounting profession is currently in transformation.
Those who get caught in the past and resist change WHILE I WAS SLEEPING will be forced deeper into commoditization.
Those who can create value through leadership, relationships and creativity will transform the indus try, as well as strengthen relationships with their existing clients."
What you're telling me, I said to Rao, is that no matter what your pro fessiondoctor, lawyer, architect, accountantif you are an American, you better be good at the touchy-feely service stuff, because anything that can be digitized can be outsourced to either the smartest or the cheapest producer, or both.
Rao answered, "Everyone has to focus on what exactly is their value-add."
But what if I am just an average accountant?
I went to a state univer sity.
I had a B+ average.
Eventually I got my CPA.
I work in a big ac counting firm, doing a lot of standard work.
I rarely meet with clients.
They keep me in the back.
But it is a decent living and the firm is basi cally happy with me.
What is going to happen to me in this system?
"It is a good question," said Rao.
"We must be honest about it.
We are in the middle of a big technological change, and when you live in a society that is at the cutting edge of that change [like America], it is hard to predict.
It's easy to predict for someone living in India.
In ten years we are going to be doing a lot of the stuff that is being done in America today.
We can predict our future.
But we are behind you.
You are defining the future.
America is always on the edge of the next cre ative wave .
So it is difficult to look into the eyes of that accountant and say this is what is going to be.
We should not trivialize that.
We must deal with it and talk about it honestly .
Any activity where we can digitize and decompose the value chain, and move the work around, will get moved around.
Some people will say, 'Yes, but you can't serve me a steak.'
True, but I can take the reservation for your table sitting anywhere in the world, if the restaurant does not have an operator.
We can say, Yes, Mr. Friedman, we can give you a table by the window.'
In other words, there are parts of the whole dining-out ex perience that we can decompose and outsource.
If you go back and read the basic economics textbooks, they will tell you: Goods are traded, but services are consumed and produced in the same place.
And you cannot export a haircut.
But we are coming close to exporting a haircut, the appointment part.
What kind of haircut do you want?
THE WORLD IS FLAT Which barber do you want?
All those things can and will be done by a call center far away."
As we ended our conversation, I asked Rao what he is up to next.
He was full of energy.
He told me he'd been talking to an Israeli company that is making some big advances in compression technology to allow for easier, better transfers of CAT scans via the Internet so you can quickly get a second opinion from a doctor half a world away.
A few weeks after I spoke with Rao, the following e-mail arrived from Bill Brody, the president of Johns Hopkins University, whom I had just interviewed for this book: Dear Tom, I am speaking at a Hopkins continuing education med ical meeting for radiologists (I used to be a radiologist)...
I came upon a very fascinating situation that I thought might interest you.
I have just learned that in many small and some medium-size hos pitals in the US, radiologists are outsourcing reading of CAT scans to doctors in India and Australia!!!
Most of this evidently occurs at night (and maybe weekends) when the radiologists do not have sufficient staffing to provide in-hospital coverage.
While some ra diology groups will use teleradiology to ship images from the hos pital to their home (or to Vail or Cape Cod, I suppose) so that they can interpret images and provide a diagnosis 24/7, apparently the smaller hospitals are shipping CAT scan images to radiologists abroad.
The advantage is that it is daytime in Australia or India when it is nighttime hereso after-hours coverage becomes more readily done by shipping the images across the globe.
Since CAT (and MRI) images are already in digital format and available on a network with a standardized protocol, it is no problem to view the images anywhere in the world .
I assume that the radiologists on the other end .
must have trained in [the] US and acquired the appropriate licenses and credentials...
The groups abroad that provide these after-hours readings are called "Nighthawks" by the American radiologists that employ them.
Best, Bill WHILE I WAS SLEEPING hank goodness I'm a journalist and not an accountant or a radioloX gist.
There will be no outsourcing for me  even if some of my read ers wish my column could be shipped off to North Korea.
At least that's what I thought.
Then I heard about the Reuters operation in India.
I didn't have time to visit the Reuters office in Bangalore, but I was able to get hold of Tom Glocer, the C E O of Reuters, to hear what he was doing.
Glocer is a pioneer in the outsourcing of elements of the news supply chain.
With 2,300 journalists around the world, in 197 bureaus, serving a market including investment bankers, derivatives traders, stockbrokers, newspapers, radio, television, and Internet outlets, Reuters has always had a very complex audience to satisfy.
After the dot-com bust, though, when many of its customers became very cost-conscious, Reuters started asking itself, for reasons of both cost and efficiency: Where do we actu ally need our people to be located to feed our global news supply chain?
And can we actually disaggregate the work of a journalist and keep part in London and New York and shift part to India?
Glocer started by looking at the most basic bread-and-butter function Reuters provides, which is breaking news about company earnings and related business developments, every second of every day.
"Exxon comes out with its earnings and we need to get that as fast as possible up on screens around the world: 'Exxon earned thirty-nine cents this quarter as opposed to thirty-six cents last quarter.'
The core competency there is speed and accuracy," explained Glocer.
"You don't need a lot of analysis.
We just need to get the basic news up as fast as possible.
The flash should be out in seconds after the company releases, and the table [showing the recent history of quarterly earnings] a few seconds later."
Those sorts of earnings flashes are to the news business what vanilla is to the ice cream businessa basic commodity that actually can be made anywhere in the flat world.
The real value-added knowledge work hap pens in the next five minutes.
That is when you need a real journalist who knows how to get a comment from the company, a comment from the top two analysts in the field, and even some word from competitors THE WORLD IS FLAT to put the earnings report in perspective.
"That needs a higher journalis tic skill setsomeone in the market with contacts, who knows who the best industry analysts are and has taken the right people to lunch," said Glocer.
The dot-com bust and the flattening of the world forced Glocer to re think how Reuters delivered newswhether it could disaggregate the functions of a journalist and ship the low-value-added functions to India.
His primary goal was to reduce the overlap Reuters payroll, while pre serving as many good journalism jobs as possible.
"So the first thing we did," said Glocer, "was hire six reporters in Bangalore as an experiment.
We said, 'Let's let them just do the flash headlines and the tables and whatever else we can get them to do in Bangalore.'"
These new Indian hires had accounting backgrounds and were trained by Reuters, but they were paid standard local wages and vacation and health benefits.
"India is an unbelievably rich place for recruiting people, not only with technical skills but also financial skills," said Glocer.
When a company puts out its earnings, one of the first things it does is hand it to the wiresReuters, Dow Jones, and Bloombergfor distribution.
"We will get that raw data," he said, "and then it's a race to see how fast we can turn it around.
Bangalore is one of the most wired places in the world, and although there's a slight delayone second or lessin getting the information over there, it turns out you can just as easily sit in Bangalore and get the electronic version of a press release and turn it into a story as you can in London or New York."
The difference, however, is that wages and rents in Bangalore are less than one-fifth what they are in those Western capitals.
While economics and the flattening of the world have pushed Reuters down this path, Glocer has tried to make a virtue of necessity.
"We think we can off-load commoditized reporting and get that done ef ficiently somewhere else in the world," he said, and then give the con ventional Reuters journalists, whom the company is able to retain, a chance to focus on doing much higher-value-added and personally ful filling journalism and analysis.
"Let's say you were a Reuters journalist in New York.
Do you reach your life's fulfillment by turning press releases into boxes on the screen, or by doing the analysis?"
asked Glocer.
WHILE I WAS SLEEPING Obviously, it is the latter.
Outsourcing news bulletins to India also allows Reuters to extend the breadth of its reporting to more small-cap compa nies, companies it was not cost-efficient for Reuters to follow before with higher-paid journalists in New York.
But with lower-wage Indian re porters, who can be hired in large numbers for the cost of one reporter in New York, it can now do that from Bangalore.
By the summer of 2004, Reuters had grown its Bangalore content operation to three hundred staff, aiming eventually for a total of fifteen hundred.
Some of those are Reuters veterans sent out to train the Indian teams, some are reporters fil ing earnings flashes, but most are journalists doing slightly more special ized data analysisnumber crunchingfor securities offerings.
"A lot of our clients are doing the same thing," said Glocer.
"Investment research has had to have huge amounts of cost ripped out of it, so a lot of firms are using shift work in Bangalore to do bread-andbutter company analysis."
Until recently the big Wall Street firms had conducted investment research by spending millions of dollars on star analysts and then charging part of their salaries to their stockbrokerage departments, which shared the analysis with their best customers, and part to their investment banking business, which sometimes used glow ing analyses of a company to lure its banking business.
In the wake of New York State attorney general Eliot Spitzer's investigations into Wall Street practices, following several scandals, investment banking and stockbrokerage have had to be distinctly separatedso that analysts will stop hyping companies in order to get their investment banking.
But as a result, the big Wall Street investment firms have had to sharply reduce the cost of their market research, all of which has to be paid for now by their brokerage departments alone.
And this created a great incentive for them to outsource some of this analytical work to places like Bangalore.
In addition to being able to pay an analyst in Bangalore about $15,000 in total compensation, as opposed to $80,000 in New York or London, Reuters has found that its India employees tend to be financially literate and highly motivated as well.
Reuters also recently opened a software de velopment center in Bangkok because it turned out to be a good place to recruit developers who had been overlooked by all the Western compa nies vying for talent in Bangalore.
THE WORLD IS FLAT I find myself torn by this trend.
Having started my career as a wire ser vice reporter with United Press International, I have enormous sympathy with wire service reporters and the pressures, both professional and fi nancial, under which they toil.
But UPI might still be thriving today as a wire service, which it is not, if it had been able to outsource some of its lower-end business when I started as a reporter in London twenty-five years ago.
"It is delicate with the staff," said Glocer, who has cut the entire Reuters staff by roughly a quarter, without deep cuts among the re porters.
The Reuters staff, he said, understand that this is being done so that the company can survive and then thrive again.
At the same time, said Glocer, "these are sophisticated people out reporting.
They see that our clients are doing the exact same things.
They get the plot of the story .
What is vital is to be honest with people about what we are do ing and why and not sugarcoat the message.
I firmly believe in the lesson of classical economists about moving work to where it can be done best.
However, we must not ignore that in some cases, individual workers will not easily find new work.
For them, retraining and an adequate social safety net are needed."
In an effort to deal straight with the Reuters staff, David Schlesinger, who is now the company's global managing editor, sent all editorial em ployees a memo, which included the following excerpt: O F F - S H O R I N G WITH O B L I G A T I O N I grew up in New London, Connecticut, which in the 19th century was a major whaling center.
In the 1960s and 70's the whales were long gone and the major employers in the region were connected with the militarynot a surprise during the Vietnam era.
My class mates' parents worked at Electric Boat, the Navy and the Coast Guard.
The peace dividend changed the region once again, and now it is best known for the great gambling casinos of Mohegan Sun and Foxwoods and for the pharmaceutical researchers of Pfizer.
Jobs went; jobs were created.
Skills went out of use; new skills were required.
The region changed; people changed.
New London, of course, was not unique.
How many mill towns saw their WHILE I WAS SLEEPING mills close; how many shoe towns saw the shoe industry move elsewhere; how many towns that were once textile powerhouses now buy all their linens from China?
Change is hard.
Change is hardest on those caught by surprise.
Change is hardest on those who have difficulty changing too.
But change is natural; change is not new; change is important.
The current debate about offshoring is dangerously hot.
But the debate about work going to India, China and Mexico is actually no different from the debate once held about submarine work leaving New London or shoe work leaving Massachusetts or textile work leaving North Carolina.
Work gets done where it can be done most effectively and efficiently.
That ultimately helps the New Londons, New Bedfords and New Yorks of this world even more than it helps the Bangalores and Shenzhens.
It helps because it frees up people and capital to do different, more sophisticated work, and it helps because it gives an opportunity to produce the end product more cheaply, benefiting customers even as it helps the corporation.
It's certainly difficult for individuals to think about "their" work going away, being done thousands of miles away by someone earning thousands of dollars less per year.
But it's time to think about the opportunity as well as the pain, just as it's time to think about the obligations of off-shoring as well as the opportunities .
Every person, just as every corporation, must tend to his or her own eco nomic destiny, just as our parents and grandparents in the mills, shoe shops and factories did.
o you know what an Indian call center sounds like?
While filming the documentary about outsourcing, the T V crew and I spent an evening at the Indian-owned "24/7 Customer" call center in Bangalore.
The call center is a cross between a co-ed college frat house and a phone bank raising money for the local public T V station.
There are several THE WORLD IS FLAT floors with rooms full of twenty-somethingssome twenty-five hundred in allworking the phones.
Some are known as "outbound" operators, selling everything from credit cards to phone minutes.
Others deal with "inbound" calls everything from tracing lost luggage for U.S. and European airline passengers to solving computer problems for confused American consumers.
The calls are transferred here by satellite and un dersea fiber-optic cable.
Each vast floor of a call center consists of clus ters of cubicles.
The young people work in little teams under the banner of the company whose phone support they are providing.
So one corner might be the Dell group, another might be flying the flag of Microsoft.
Their working conditions look like those at your average insurance com pany.
Although I am sure that there are call centers that are operated like sweatshops, 24/7 is not one of them.
Most of the young people I interviewed give all or part of their salary to their parents.
In fact, many of them have starting salaries that are higher than their parents' retiring salaries.
For entry-level jobs into the global economy, these are about as good as it gets.
I was wandering around the Microsoft section around six p.m. Bangalore time, when most of these young people start their workday to coincide with the dawn in America, when I asked a young Indian com puter expert there a simple question: What was the record on the floor for the longest phone call to help some American who got lost in the maze of his or her own software?
Without missing a beat he answered, "Eleven hours."
"Eleven hours?"
I exclaimed.
"Eleven hours," he said.
I have no way of checking whether this is true, but you do hear snip pets of some oddly familiar conversations as you walk the floor at 24/7 and just listen over the shoulders of different call center operators doing their things.
Here is a small sample of what we heard that night while filming for Discovery Times.
It should be read, if you can imagine this, in the voice of someone with an Indian accent trying to imitate an American or a Brit.
Also imagine that no matter how rude, unhappy, ir ritated, or ornery the voices are on the other end of the line, these young Indians are incessantly and unfailingly polite.
WHILE I WAS SLEEPING Woman call center operator: "Good afternoon, may I speak with .
?"
(Someone on the other end just slammed down the phone.)
Male call center operator: "Merchant services, this is Jerry, may I help you?"
(The Indian call center operators adopt Western names of their own choosing.
The idea, of course, is to make their American or European customers feel more comfortable.
Most of the young Indians I talked to about this were not offended but took it as an opportunity to have some fun.
While a few just opt for Susan or Bob, some really get creative.)
Woman operator in Bangalore speaking to an American: "My name is Ivy Timberwoods and I am calling you .
."
Woman operator in Bangalore getting an American's identity num ber: "May I have the last four digits of your Social Security?"
Woman operator in Bangalore giving directions as though she were in Manhattan and looking out her window: "Yes, we have a branch on Seventy-fourth and Second Avenue, a branch at Fifty-fourth and Lexington .
."
Male operator in Bangalore selling a credit card he could never af ford himself: "This card comes to you with one of the lowest APR .
."
Woman operator in Bangalore explaining to an American how she screwed up her checking account: "Check number six-six-five for eightyone dollars and fifty-five cents.
You will still be hit by the thirty-dollar charge.
Am I clear?"
Woman operator in Bangalore after walking an American through a computer glitch: "Not a problem, Mr. Jassup.
Thank you for your time.
Take care.
Bye-bye."
Woman operator in Bangalore after someone has just slammed down the phone on her: "Hello?
Hello?"
Woman operator in Bangalore apologizing for calling someone in America too early: "This is just a courtesy call, I'll call back later in the evening.
."
Male operator in Bangalore trying desperately to sell an airline credit card to someone in America who doesn't seem to want one: "Is that be cause you have too many credit cards, or you don't like flying, Mrs.
Bell?"
Woman operator in Bangalore trying to talk an American out of her THE WORLD IS FLAT computer crash: "Start switching between memory okay and memory test.
."
Male operator in Bangalore doing the same thing: "All right, then, let's just punch in three and press Enter .
."
Woman operator in Bangalore trying to help an American who can not stand being on the help line another second: "Yes, ma'am, I do understand that you are in a hurry right now.
I am just trying to help you out.
."
Woman operator in Bangalore getting another phone slammed down on her: "Yes, well, so what time would be goo .
. "
Same woman operator in Bangalore getting another phone slammed down on her: "Why, Mrs. Kent, it's not a .
.." Same woman operator in Bangalore getting another phone slammed down on her: "As a safety back .
Hello?"
Same woman operator in Bangalore looking up from her phone: "I definitely have a bad day!"
Woman operator in Bangalore trying to help an American woman with a computer problem that she has never heard before: "What is the problem with this machine, ma'am?
The monitor is burning?"
T here are currently about 245,000 Indians answering phones from all over the world or dialing out to solicit people for credit cards or cell phone bargains or overdue bills.
These call center jobs are low-wage, low-prestige jobs in America, but when shitted to India they become high-wage, high-prestige jobs.
The esprit de corps at 24/7 and other call centers I visited seemed quite high, and the young people were all eager to share some of the bizarre phone conversations they've had with Americans who dialed 1-800-HELP, thinking they would wind up talk ing to someone around the block, not around the world.
C. M. Meghna, a 24/7 call center female operator, told me, "I've had lots of customers who call in [with questions] not even connected to the product that we're dealing with.
They would call in because they had lost their wallet or just to talk to somebody.
I'm like, 'Okay, all right, maybe WHILE I WAS SLEEPING you should look under the bed [for your wallet] or where do you nor mally keep it,' and she's like, 'Okay, thank you so much for helping.'
" Nitu Somaiah: "One of the customers asked me to marry him."
Sophie Sunder worked for Delta's lost-baggage department: "I re member this lady called from Texas," she said, "and she was, like, weep ing on the phone.
She had traveled two connecting flights and she lost her bag and in the bag was her daughter's wedding gown and wedding ring and I felt so sad for her and there was nothing I could do.
I had no information.
"Most of the customers were irate," said Sunder.
"The first thing they say is, 'Where's my bag?
I want my bag now!'
We were like supposed to say, 'Excuse me, can I have your first name and last name?'
'But where's my bag!'
Some would ask which country am I from?
We are supposed to tell the truth, [so] we tell them India.
Some thought it was Indiana, not India!
Some did not know where India is.
I said it is the country next to Pakistan."
Although the great majority of the calls are rather routine and dull, competition for these jobs is fiercenot only because they pay well, but because you can work at night and go to school during part of the day, so they are stepping-stones toward a higher standard of living.
P. V. Kannan, CEO and cofounder of 24/7, explained to me how it all worked: "Today we have over four thousand associates spread out in Bangalore, Hyder abad, and Chennai.
Our associates start out with a take-home pay of roughly $200 a month, which grows to $300 to $400 per month in six months.
We also provide transportation, lunch, and dinner at no extra cost.
We provide life insurance, medical insurance for the entire fam ilyand other benefits."
Therefore, the total cost of each call center operator is actually around $500 per month when they start out and closer to $600 to $700 per month after six months.
Everyone is also entitled to performance bonuses that allow them to earn, in certain cases, the equivalent of 100 percent of their base salary.
"Around 10 to 20 percent of our associ ates pursue a degree in business or computer science during the day hours," said Kannan, adding that more than one-third are taking some THE WORLD IS FLAT kind of extra computer or business training, even if it is not toward a degree.
"It is quite common in India for people to pursue education through their twentiesself-improvement is a big theme and actively encouraged by parents and companies.
We sponsor an MBA program for consistent performers [with] full-day classes over the weekend.
Everyone works eight hours a day, five days a week, with two fifteen-minute breaks and an hour off for lunch or dinner."
Not surprisingly, the 24/7 customer call center gets about seven hun dred applications a day, but only 6 percent of applicants are hired.
Here is a snippet from a recruiting session for call center operators at a women's college in Bangalore: Recruiter 1 : "Good morning, girls."
Class in unison: "Good morning, ma'am."
Recruiter 1 : "We have been retained by some of the multinationals here to do the recruitment for them.
The primary clients that we are re cruiting [for] today are Honeywell.
And also for America Online."
The young women dozens of them then all lined up with their application forms and waited to be interviewed by a recruiter at a wooden table.
Here is what some of the interviews sounded like: Recruiter 1: "What kind of job are you looking at?"
Applicant 1: "It should be based on accounts, then, where I can grow, I can grow in my career."
Recruiter 1: "You have to be more confident about yourself when you're speaking.
You're very nervous.
I want you to work a little on that and then get in touch with us."
Recruiter 2 to another applicant: "Tell me something about yourself."
Applicant 2: "I have passed my SSC with distinction.
Second P also with distinction.
And I also hold a 70 percent aggregate in previous two years."
(This is Indian lingo for their equivalents of GPA and SAT scores.)
Recruiter 2: "Go a little slow.
Don't be nervous.
Be cool."
The next step for those applicants who are hired at a call center is the training program, which they are paid to attend.
It combines learning how to handle the specific processes for the company whose calls they will be taking or making, and attending something called "accent neu tralization class."
These are daylong sessions with a language teacher WHILE I WAS SLEEPING who prepares the new Indian hires to disguise their pronounced Indian accents when speaking English and replace them with American, Cana dian, or British ones depending on which part of the world they will be speaking with.
It's pretty bizarre to watch.
The class I sat in on was being trained to speak in a neutral middle-American accent.
The students were asked to read over and over a single phonetic paragraph designed to teach them how to soften their t's and to roll their r's.
Their teacher, a charming eight-months-pregnant young woman dressed in a traditional Indian sari, moved seamlessly among British, American, and Canadian accents as she demonstrated reading a para graph designed to highlight phonetics.
She said to the class, "Remember the first day I told you that the Americans flap the 'tuh' sound?
You know, it sounds like an almost 'duh' soundnot crisp and clear like the British.
So I would not say"here she was crisp and sharp"'Betty bought a bit of better butter' or 'Insert a quarter in the meter.'
But I would say"her voice very flat'"Insert a quarter in the meter' or 'Betty bought a bit of better butter.'
So I'm just going to read it out for you once, and then we'll read it together.
All right?
'Thirty little turtles in a bottle of bottled water.
A bottle of bottled water held thirty little turtles.
It didn't matter that each turtle had to rattle a metal ladle in order to get a little bit of noodles.'
"All right, who's going to read first?"
the instructor asked.
Each mem ber of the class then took a turn trying to say this tongue twister in an American accent.
Some of them got it on the first try, and others, well, let's just say that you wouldn't think they were in Kansas City if they an swered your call to Delta's lost-luggage number.
After listening to them stumble through this phonetics lesson for half an hour, I asked the teacher if she would like me to give them an authen tic versionsince I'm originally from Minnesota, smack in the Midwest, and still speak like someone out of the movie Fargo.
Absolutely, she said.
So I read the following paragraph: "A bottle of botded water held thirty lit tle turtles.
It didn't matter that each turtle had to rattle a metal ladle in or der to get a little bit of noodles, a total turtle delicacy .
The problem was that there were many turtle battles for less than oodles of noodles.
Every time they thought about grappling with the haggler turtles their little tur tle minds boggled and they only caught a little bit of noodles."
THE WORLD IS FLAT The class responded enthusiastically.
It was the first time I ever got an ovation for speaking Minnesotan.
On the surface, there is something un appealing about the idea of inducing other people to flatten their accents in order to compete in a flatter world.
But before you disparage it, you have to taste just how hungry these kids are to escape the lower end of the middle class and move up.
If a little accent modification is the price they have to pay to jump a rung of the ladder, then so be itthey say.
"This is a high-stress environment," said Nilekani, the C E O of Infosys, which also runs a big call center.
"It is twenty-four by seven.
You work in the day, and then the night, and then the next morning."
But the working environment, he insisted, "is not the tension of alienation.
It is the tension of success.
They are dealing with the challenges of success, of high-pressure living.
It is not the challenge of worrying about whether they would have a challenge."
That was certainly the sense I got from talking to a lot of the call cen ter operators on the floor.
Like any explosion of modernity, outsourcing is challenging traditional norms and ways of life.
But educated Indians have been held back so many years by both poverty and a socialist bu reaucracy that many of them seem more than ready to put up with the hours.
And needless to say, it is much easier and more satisfying for them to work hard in Bangalore than to pack up and try to make a new start in America.
In the flat world they can stay in India, make a decent salary, and not have to be away from families, friends, food, and culture.
At the end of the day, these new jobs actually allow them to be more Indian.
Said Anney Unnikrishnan, a personnel manager at 24/7, "I finished my MBA and I remember writing the GMAT and getting into Purdue University.
But I couldn't go because I couldn't afford it.
I didn't have the money for it.
Now I can, [but] I see a whole lot of American industry has come into Bangalore and I don't really need to go there.
I can work for a multinational sitting right here.
So I still get my rice and sambar [a tradi tional Indian dish], which I eat.
I don't need to, you know, learn to eat coleslaw and cold beef.
I still continue with my Indian food and I still work for a multinational.
Why should I go to America?"
The relatively high standard of living that she can now e n j o y enough for a small apartment and car in Bangalore is good for America WHILE I WAS SLEEPING as well.
When you look around at 24/7's call center, you see that all the computers are running Microsoft Windows.
The chips are designed by Intel.
The phones are from Lucent.
The air-conditioning is by Carrier, and even the bottled water is by Coke.
In addition, 90 percent of the shares in 24/7 are owned by U.S. investors.
This explains why, although the United States has lost some service jobs to India in recent years, total exports from American-based companiesmerchandise and services to India have grown from $2.5 billion in 1990 to $5 billion in 2003.
So even with the outsourcing of some service jobs from the United States to India, India's growing economy is creating a demand for many more American goods and services.
What goes around, comes around.
N ine years ago, when Japan was beating America's brains out in the auto industry, I wrote a column about playing the computer geog raphy game Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?
with my then nine-year-old daughter, Orly.
I was trying to help her by giving her a clue suggesting that Carmen had gone to Detroit, so I asked her, "Where are cars made?"
And without missing a beat she answered, "Japan."
Ouch!
Well, I was reminded of that story while visiting Global Edge, an Indian software design firm in Bangalore.
The company's marketing manager, Rajesh Rao, told me that he had just made a cold call to the VP for engi neering of a U.S. company, trying to drum up business.
As soon as Mr. Rao introduced himself as calling from an Indian software firm, the U.S. exec utive said to him, "Namaste," a common Hindi greeting.
Said Mr. Rao, "A few years ago nobody in America wanted to talk to us.
Now they are eager."
And a few even know how to say hello in proper Hindu fashion.
So now I wonder: If I have a granddaughter one day, and I tell her I'm going to India, will she say, "Grandpa, is that where software comes from?"
No, not yet, honey.
Every new productfrom software to widgets goes through a cycle that begins with basic research, then applied research, then incubation, then development, then testing, then manufacturing, then deployment, then support, then continuation engineering in order to THE WORLD IS FLAT add improvements.
Each of these phases is specialized and unique, and neither India nor China nor Russia has a critical mass of talent that can handle the whole product cycle for a big American multinational.
But these countries are steadily developing their research and development capabilities to handle more and more of these phases.
As that continues, we really will see the beginning of what Satyam Cherukuri, of Sarnoff, an American research and development firm, has called "the globaliza tion of innovation" and an end to the old model of a single American or European multinational handling all the elements of the product devel opment cycle from its own resources.
More and more American and European companies are outsourcing significant research and develop ment tasks to India, Russia, and China.
According to the information technology office of the state govern ment in Karnataka, where Bangalore is located, Indian units of Cisco Systems, Intel, IBM, Texas Instruments, and G E have already filed a thousand patent applications with the U.S. Patent Office.
Texas Instru ments alone has had 225 U.S. patents awarded to its Indian operation.
"The Intel team in Bangalore is developing microprocessor chips for high-speed broadband wireless technology, to be launched in 2006," the Karnataka IT office said, in a statement issued at the end of 2004, and "at GE's John F. Welch Technology Centre in Bangalore, engineers are de veloping new ideas for aircraft engines, transport systems and plastics."
Indeed, G E over the years has frequently transferred Indian engineers who worked for it in the United States back to India to integrate its whole global research effort.
G E now even sends non-Indians to Bangalore.
Vivek Paul is the president of Wipro Technologies, another of the elite Indian technology companies, but he is based in Silicon Valley to be close to Wipro s American customers.
Before coming to Wipro, Paul managed GE's CAT scanner business out of Milwaukee.
At the time he had a French colleague who managed GE's power generator business for the scanners out of France.
"I ran into him on an airplane recently," said Paul, "and he told me he had moved to India to head up GE's high-energy research there."
I told Vivek that I love hearing an Indian who used to head up GE's C T business in Milwaukee but now runs Wipro's consulting business in WHILE I WAS SLEEPING Silicon Valley tell me about his former French colleague who has moved to Bangalore to work for GE.
That is a flat world.
E very time I think I have found the last, most obscure job that could be outsourced to Bangalore, I discover a new one.
My friend Vivek Kulkarni used to head the government office in Bangalore responsible for attracting high technology global investment.
After stepping down from that post in 2003, he started a company called B2K, with a division called Brickwork, which offers busy global executives their own personal assistant in India.
Say you are running a company and you have been asked to give a speech and a PowerPoint presentation in two days.
Your "remote executive assistant" in India, provided by Brickwork, will do all the research for you, create the PowerPoint presentation, and e-mail the whole thing to you overnight so that it is on your desk the day you have to deliver it.
"You can give your personal remote executive assistant their assign ment when you are leaving work at the end of the day in New York City, and it will be ready for you the next morning," explained Kulkarni.
"Because of the time difference with India, they can work on it while you sleep and have it back in your morning."
Kulkarni suggested I hire a re mote assistant in India to do all the research for this book.
"He or she could also help you keep pace with what you want to read.
When you wake up, you will find the completed summary in your in-box."
(I told him no one could be better than my longtime assistant, Maya Gorman, who sits ten feet away!)
Having your own personal remote executive assistant costs around $1,500 to $2,000 a month, and given the pool of Indian college grads from which Brickwork can recruit, the brainpower you can hire dollarfor-dollar is substantial.
As Brickwork's promotional material says, "India's talent pool provides companies access to a broad spectrum of highly qualified people.
In addition to fresh graduates, which are around 2.5 million per year, many qualified homemakers are entering the job market."
India's business schools, it adds, produce around eighty-nine thousand MBAs per year.
THE WORLD IS FLAT "We've had a wonderful response," said Kulkarni, with clients com ing from two main areas.
One is American health-care consultants, who often need lots of numbers crunched and PowerPoint presentations drawn up.
The other, he said, are American investment banks and fi nancial services companies, which often need to prepare glossy pam phlets with graphs to illustrate the benefits of an IPO or a proposed merger.
In the case of a merger, Brickwork will prepare those sections of the report dealing with general market conditions and trends, where most of the research can be gleaned off the Web and summarized in a standard format.
"The judgment of how to price the deal will come from the investment bankers themselves," said Kulkarni.
"We will do the lower-end work, and they will do the things that require critical judg ment and experience, close to the market."
The more projects his team of remote executive assistants engages in, the more knowledge they build up.
They are full of ambition to do their higher problem solving as well, said Kulkarni.
"The idea is to constantly learn.
You are always taking an examination.
There is no end to learning.
There is no real end to what can be done by whom."
U nlike Columbus, I didn't stop with India.
After I got home, I de cided to keep exploring the East for more signs that the world was flat.
So after India, I was soon off to Tokyo, where I had a chance to in terview Kenichi Ohmae, the legendary former McKinsey & Company consultant in Japan.
Ohmae has left McKinsey and struck out on his own in business, Ohmae & Associates.
And what do they do?
Not con sulting anymore, explained Ohmae.
He is now spearheading a drive to outsource low-end Japanese jobs to Japanese-speaking call centers and service providers in China.
"Say what?"
I asked.
"To China?
Didn't the Japanese once colonize China, leaving a very bad taste in the mouths of the Chinese?"
Well, yes, said Ohmae, but he explained that the Japanese also left be hind a large number of Japanese speakers who have maintained a slice of Japanese culture, from sushi to karaoke, in northeastern China, particu larly around the northeastern port city of Dalian.
Dalian has become for WHILE I WAS SLEEPING Japan what Bangalore has become for America and the other Englishspeaking countries: outsourcing central.
The Chinese may never forgive Japan for what it did to China in the last century, but the Chinese are so focused on leading the world in the next century that they are ready to brush up on their Japanese and take all the work Japan can outsource.
"The recruiting is quite easy," said Ohmae in early 2004.
"About onethird of the people in this region [around Dalian] have taken Japanese as a second language in high school.
So all of these Japanese companies are coming in."
Ohmae's company is doing primarily data-entry work in China, where Chinese workers take handwritten Japanese documents, which are scanned, faxed, or e-mailed over from Japan to Dalian, and then type them into a digital database in Japanese characters.
Ohmae's company has developed a software program that takes the data to be entered and breaks it down into packets.
These packets can then be sent around China or Japan for typing, depending on the specialty required, and then reassem bled at the company's database in its Tokyo headquarters.
"We have the ability to allocate the job to the person who knows the area best."
Ohmae's company even has contracts with more than seventy thousand housewives, some of them specialists in medical or legal terminologies, to do data-entry work at home.
The firm has recently expanded into computer-aided de signs for a Japanese housing company.
"When you negotiate with the cus tomer in Japan for building a house," he explained, "you would sketch out a floor planmost of these companies don't use computers."
So the handdrawn plans are sent electronically to China, where they are converted into digital designs, which then are e-mailed back to the Japanese building firm, which turns them into manufacturing blueprints.
"We took the bestperforming Chinese data operators," said Ohmae, "and now they are pro cessing seventy houses a day."
Chinese doing computer drawings for Japanese homes, nearly sev enty years after a rapacious Japanese army occupied China, razing many homes in the process.
Maybe there is hope for this flat world .
needed to see Dalian, this Bangalore of China, firsthand, so I kept moving around the East.
Dalian is impressive not just for a Chinese THE WORLD IS FLAT city.
With its wide boulevards, beautiful green spaces, and nexus of uni versities, technical colleges, and massive software park, Dalian would stand out in Silicon Valley.
I had been here in 1998, but there had been so much new building since then that I did not recognize the place.
Dalian, which is located about an hour's flight northeast of Beijing, sym bolizes how rapidly China's most modern citiesand there are still plenty of miserable, backward onesare grabbing business as knowledge centers, not just as manufacturing hubs.
The signs on the buildings tell the whole story: G E , Microsoft, Dell, SAP, HP, Sony, and Accentureto name but a fewall are having backroom work done here to support their Asian operations, as well as new software research and development.
Because of its proximity to Japan and Korea, each only about an hour away by air, its large number of Japanese speakers, its abundance of Internet bandwidth, and many parks and a world-class golf course (all of which appeal to knowledge workers), Dalian has become an attractive locus for Japanese outsourcing.
Japanese firms can hire three Chinese software engineers for the price of one in Japan and still have change to pay a roomful of call center operators ($90 a month starting salary).
No wonder some twenty-eight hundred Japanese companies have set up op erations here or teamed up with Chinese partners.
"I've taken a lot of American people to Dalian, and they are amazed at how fast the China economy is growing in this high-tech area," said Win Liu, director of U.S./EU projects for DHC, one of Dalian's biggest homegrown software firms, which has expanded from thirty to twelve hundred employees in six years.
"Americans don't realize the challenge to the extent that they should."
Dalian's dynamic mayor, Xia Deren, forty-nine, is a former college president.
(For a Communist authoritarian system, China does a pretty good job of promoting people on merit.
The Mandarin meritocratic cul ture here still runs very deep.)
Over a traditional ten-course Chinese din ner at a local hotel, the mayor told me how far Dalian has come and just where he intends to take it.
"We have twenty-two universities and col leges with over two hundred thousand students in Dalian," he explained.
More than half those students graduate with engineering or science de grees, and even those who don't, those who study history or literature, are WHILE I WAS SLEEPING still being directed to spend a year studying Japanese or English, plus computer science, so that they will be employable.
The mayor estimated that more than half the residents of Dalian had access to the Internet at the office, home, or school.
"The Japanese enterprises originally started some data-processing in dustries here," the mayor added, "and with this as a base they have now moved to R & D and software development...
In the past one or two years, the software companies of the U.S. are also making some attempts to move outsourcing of software from the U.S. to our city .
We are ap proaching and we are catching up with the Indians.
Exports of software products [from Dalian] have been increasing by 50 percent annually.
And China is now becoming the country that develops the largest number of university graduates.
Though in general our English is not as competent as that of the Indian people, we have a bigger population, [so] we can pick out the most intelligent students who can speak the best English."
Are Dalian residents bothered by working for the Japanese, whose government has still never formally apologized for what the wartime Japanese government did to China?
"We will never forget that a historical war occurred between the two nations," he answered, "but when it comes to the field of economy, we only focus on the economic problemsespecially if we talk about the software outsourcing business.
If the U.S. and Japanese companies make their products in our city, we consider that to be a good thing.
Our youngsters are trying to learn Japanese, to master this tool so they can compete with their Japanese counterparts to successfully land highsalary positions for themselves in the future."
The mayor then added for good measure, "My personal feeling is that Chinese youngsters are more ambitious than Japanese or American youngsters in recent years, but I don't think they are ambitious enough, because they are not as ambitious as my generation.
Because our gener ation, before they got into university and colleges, were sent to distant rural areas and factories and military teams, and went through a very hard time, so in terms of the spirit to overcome and face the hardships, [our generation had to have more ambition] than youngsters nowadays."
Mayor Xia had a charmingly direct way of describing the world, and THE WORLD IS FLAT although some of what he had to say gets lost in translation, he gets it and Americans should too: "The rule of the market economy," this Communist official explained to me, "is that if somewhere has the rich est human resources and the cheapest labor, of course the enterprises and the businesses will naturally go there."
In manufacturing, he pointed out, "Chinese people first were the employees and working for the big foreign manufacturers, and after several years, after we have learned all the processes and steps, we can start our own firms.
Software will go down the same road .
First we will have our young people employed by the foreigners, and then we will start our own companies.
It is like building a building.
Today, the U.S., you are the designers, the archi tects, and the developing countries are the bricklayers for the buildings.
But one day I hope we will be the architects."
I just kept exploringeast and west.
By the summer of 2004,1 was in Colorado on vacation.
I had heard about this new low-fare airline called JetBlue, which was launched in 1999.
I had no idea where they operated, but I needed to fly between Washington and Atlanta, and couldn't quite get the times I wanted, so I decided to call JetBlue and see where exactly they flew.
I confess I did have another motive.
I had heard that JetBlue had outsourced its entire reservation system to housewives in Utah, and I wanted to check this out.
So I dialed JetBlue reservations and had the following conversation with the agent: "Hello, this is Dolly.
Can I help you?"
answered a grandmotherly voice.
"Yes, I would like to fly from Washington to Atlanta," I said.
"Do you fly that route?"
"No, I'm sorry we don't.
We fly from Washington to Ft. Lauderdale," said Dolly.
"How about Washington to New York City?"
I asked.
"I'm sorry, we don't fly that route.
We do fly from Washington to Oakland and Long Beach," said Dolly.
"Say, can I ask you something?
Are you really at home?
I read that JetBlue agents just work at home."
WHILE I WAS SLEEPING "Yes, I am," said Dolly in the most cheerful voice.
(I later confirmed with JetBlue that her full name is Dolly Baker.)
"I am sitting in my office upstairs in my house, looking out the window at a beautiful sunny day.
Just five minutes ago someone called and asked me that same question and I told them and they said, 'Good, I thought you were going to tell me you were in New Delhi.'
" "Where do you live?"
I asked.
"Salt Lake City, Utah," said Dolly.
"We have a two-story home, and I love working here, especially in the winter when the snow is swirling and I am up here in the office at home."
"How do you get such a job?"
I asked.
"You know, they don't advertise," said Dolly in the sweetest possible voice.
"It's all by word of mouth.
I worked for the state government and I retired, and [after a little while] I thought I have to do something else and I just love it."
David Neeleman, the founder of JetBlue Airways Corp., has a name for all this.
He calls it "homesourcing."
JetBlue now has four hundred reservation agents, like Dolly, working at home in the Salt Lake City area, taking reservationsin between babysitting, exercising, writing novels, and cooking dinner.
A few months later I visited Neeleman at JetBlue's headquarters in New York, and he explained to me the virtues of homesourcing, which he actually started at Morris Air, his first venture in the airline business.
(It was bought by Southwest.)
"We had 250 people in their homes doing reservations at Morris Air," said Neeleman.
"They were 30 percent more productivethey take 30 percent more bookings, by just being happier.
They were more loyal and there was less attrition.
So when I started JetBlue, I said, 'We are going to have 100 percent reservation at home.'"
Neeleman has a personal reason for wanting to do this.
He is a Mormon and believes that society will be better off if more mothers are able to stay at home with their young children but are given a chance to be wage earners at the same time.
So he based his home reservations system in Salt Lake City, where the vast majority of the women are Mormons and many are stay-at-home mothers.
Home reservationists work twentyfive hours a week and have to come into the JetBlue regional office in THE WORLD IS FLAT Salt Lake City for four hours a month to learn new skills and be brought up to date on what is going on inside the company.
"We will never outsource to India," said Neeleman.
"The quality we can get here is far superior.
[Employers] are more willing to out source to India than to their own homes, and I can't understand that.
Somehow they think that people need to be sitting in front of them or some boss they have designated.
The productivity we get here more than makes up for the India [wage] factor."
A Los Angeles Times story about JetBlue (May 9, 2004) noted that "in 1997, 11.6 million employees of U.S. companies worked from home at least part of the time.
Today, that number has soared to 23.5 million 16% of the American labor force.
(Meanwhile, the ranks of the self-employed, who often work from home, have swelled during the same periodto 23.4 million from 18 million.)
In some eyes, homesourcing and outsourcing aren't so much competing strategies as they are different manifestations of the same thing: a relentless push by corporate America to lower costs and increase efficiency, wherever that may lead."
That is exactly what I was learning on my own travels: Homesourcing to Salt Lake City and outsourcing to Bangalore were just flip sides of the same coinsourcing.
And the new, new thing, I was also learning, is the degree to which it is now possible for companies and individuals to source work anywhere.
I just kept moving.
In the fall of 2004,1 accompanied the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Richard Myers, on a tour of hot spots in Iraq.
We visited Baghdad, the U.S. military headquarters in Fallujah, and the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit encampment outside Babil, in the heart of Iraq's so-called Sunni Triangle.
The makeshift 24th MEU base is a sort of Fort Apache, in the middle of a pretty hostile Iraqi Sunni Muslim population.
While General Myers was meeting with officers and enlisted men there, I was free to walk around the base, and eventu ally I wandered into the command center, where my eye was immedi ately caught by a large flat-screen TV.
On the screen was a live TV feed WHILE I WAS SLEEPING that looked to be coming from some kind of overhead camera.
It showed some people moving around behind a house.
Also on the screen, along the right side, was an active instant-messaging chat room, which seemed to be discussing the scene on the TV.
"What is that?"
I asked the soldier who was carefully monitoring all the images from a laptop.
He explained that a U.S.
Predator dronea small pilotless aircraft with a high-power television camerawas flying over an Iraqi village, in the 24th MEU's area of operation, and feeding real-time intelligence images back to his laptop and this flat screen.
This drone was actually being "flown" and manipulated by an expert who was sitting back at Nellis Air Force Base in Las Vegas, Nevada.
That's right, the drone over Iraq was actually being remotely directed from Las Vegas.
Meanwhile, the video images it was beaming back were being watched simultaneously by the 24th MEU, United States Central Command headquarters in Tampa, CentCom regional head quarters in Qatar, in the Pentagon, and probably also at the CIA.
The different analysts around the world were conducting an online chat about how to interpret what was going on and what to do about it.
It was their conversation that was scrolling down the right side of the screen.
Before I could even express my amazement, another officer traveling with us took me aback by saying that this technology had "flattened" the military hierarchyby giving so much information to the low-level offi cer, or even enlisted man, who was operating the computer, and em powering him to make decisions about the information he was gathering.
While I'm sure that no first lieutenant is going to be allowed to start a firefight without consulting superiors, the days when only senior officers had the big picture are over.
The battlefield is being leveled.
I told this story to my friend Nick Burns, the U.S. ambassador to NATO and a loyal member of the Red Sox Nation.
Nick told me he was at CentCom headquarters in Qatar in April 2004, being briefed by General John Abizaid and his staff.
Abizaid's team was seated across the table from Nick with four flat-screen TVs behind them.
The first three had overhead images being relayed in real time from different sectors of THE WORLD IS FLAT Iraq by Predator drones.
The last one, which Nick was focused on, was showing a Yankees-Red Sox game.
On one screen it was Pedro Martinez versus Derek Jeter, and on the other three it was the Jihadists versus the First Cavalry.
FLATBURGERS AND FRIES I kept movingall the way back to my home in Bethesda, Maryland.
By the time I settled back into my house from this journey to the edges of the earth, my head was spinning.
But no sooner was I home than more signs of the flattening came knocking at my door.
Some came in the form of headlines that would unnerve any parent concerned about where his college-age children are going to fit in.
For instance, Forrester Research, Inc., was projecting that more than three million service and professional jobs would move out of the country by 2015.
But my jaw really dropped when I read a July 19, 2004, article from the International Herald Tribune headlined: "Want Fries With Outsourcing?"
Pull off U.S. Interstate Highway 55 near Cape Girardeau, Missouri, and into the drive-through lane of a McDonald's next to the highway and you'll get fast, friendly service, even though the person taking your order is not in the restaurantor even in Missouri.
The order taker is in a call center in Colorado Springs, more than 900 miles, or 1,450 kilometers, away, connected to the customer and to the workers preparing the food by high-speed data lines.
Even some restaurant jobs, it seems, are not immune to outsourcing.
The man who owns the Cape Girardeau restaurant, Shannon Davis, has linked it and three other of his 12 McDonald's fran chises to the Colorado call center, which is run by another McDonald's franchisee, Steven Bigari.
And he did it for the same reasons that other business owners have embraced call centers: lower costs, greater speed and fewer mistakes.
WHILE I WAS SLEEPING Cheap, quick and reliable telecommunications lines let the order takers in Colorado Springs converse with customers in Missouri, take an electronic snapshot of them, display their order on a screen to make sure it is right, then forward the order and the photo to the restaurant kitchen.
The photo is destroyed as soon as the order is completed, Bigari said.
People picking up their burg ers never know that their order traverses two states and bounces back before they can even start driving to the pickup window.
Davis said that he had dreamed of doing something like this for more than a decade.
"We could not wait to go with it," he added.
Bigari, who created the call center for his own restaurants, was happy to obligefor a small fee per transaction.
The article went on to note that McDonald's Corp. said it found the call center idea interesting enough to start a test with three stores near its headquarters in Oak Brook, Illinois, with different software from that used by Bigari.
"Jim Sappington, a McDonald's vice president for infor mation technology, said that it was way, way too early' to tell if the call center idea would work across the thirteen thousand McDonald's restau rants in the United States.
Still, franchisees of two other McDonald's restaurants, beyond Davis's, have outsourced their drive-through order ing to Bigari in Colorado Springs.
(The other restaurants are in Brainerd, Minnesota, and Norwood, Massachusetts.)
Central to the system's suc cess, Bigari said, is the way it pairs customers' photos with their orders; by increasing accuracy, the system cuts down on the number of complaints and therefore makes the service faster.
In the fast-food business, time is truly money: shaving even five seconds off the processing time of an or der is significant," the article noted.
"Bigari said he had cut order time in his dual-lane drive-throughs by slightly more than 30 seconds, to about 1 minute, 5 seconds, on average.
That's less than half the average of 2 minutes, 36 seconds, for all McDonald's, and among the fastest of any franchise in the country, according to QSRweb.com, which tracks such things.
His drive-throughs now handle 260 cars an hour, Bigari said, 30 more than they did before he started the call center .
Though his op erators earn, on average, 40 cents an hour more than his line employees, THE WORLD IS FLAT he has cut his overall labor costs by a percentage point, even as drivethrough sales have increased .
Tests conducted by outside companies found that Bigari's drive-throughs now make mistakes on fewer than 2 percent of all orders, down from about 4 percent before he started us ing the call centers, Bigari said."
Bigari "is so enthusiastic about the call center idea," the article noted, "that he has expanded it beyond the drive-through window at his seven restaurants that use the system.
While he still offers counter service at those restaurants, most customers now order through the call center, us ing phones with credit card readers on tables in the seating area."
And I kept going east, right to my living room, where one day Ann, my wife, who is afirst-gradereading teacher, pointed out to me an article about how American kids and parents are now turning to Indians for online tutoring.
An October 2005 Associated Press report from Cochin, India, tells the whole story: A few stars are still twinkling in the inky pre-dawn sky when Koyampurath Namitha arrives for work in a quiet suburb of this south Indian city.
It's barely 4:30 a.m. when she grabs a cup of cof fee and joins more than two dozen colleagues, each settling into a cubicle with a computer and earphones.
More than 7,000 miles away, in Glenview, 111., outside Chicago, it's the evening of the previous day and 14-year-old Princeton John sits at his computer, barefoot and ready for his hour-long geometry lesson.
The high school freshman puts on a headset with a microphone and clicks on computer software that will link him through the Internet to his tutor, Namitha, many time zones away.
It's called e-tutoringyet another example of how modern communications, and an abundance of educated, low-wage Asians, are broadening the boundaries of outsourcing and work ing their way into the minutiae of American life, from replacing your lost credit card through reading your CAT scan to helping you revive your crashed computer.
Princeton is one of thousands of U.S. high school students turning to tutors in India.
WHILE I WAS SLEEPING "Hello Princeton, how are you?
How was your test?"
Namitha asks.
"Hello, yeah .
I'm good," Princeton replies.
"It was good."
Namitha works for a company called Growing Stars, based in Cochin and Fremont, California.
Princeton and his 12-year-old sister Priscilla each meet with their online math teacher twice a week.
The chitchat ends quickly and a geometry worksheet pops up on Princeton's computer screen.
Teacher and pupil speak to one another, type messages and use digital "pencils" to work on problems, highlight graphs and erase mistakes.
Princeton scrawls on something that looks like a hyped-up mouse pad and it shows up on Namitha's screen.
He can also use a scanner to send copies of assignments or textbook pages that he needs help understand ing.
"Here we go," Princeton says, as they begin a lesson on such concepts as parallel lines and complementary angles in the quiet coziness of the family's suburban home .
The first e-tutoring businesses started less than three years ago, and already thousands of Indian teachers coach U.S. students in math, science or English for about $15 to $20 an hour, a fraction of the $40 to $100 that private tutoring costs in the United States... Princeton's mother, Bessy Piusten, is pleased with the results, saying her children have been getting all A's and B's since they started online tutoring about two years ago .
At the end of the session, Namitha assigns Princeton problems for their next meeting.
"Homework!
C'mon!"
Princeton protests.
"Fine, fine.
But without homework, life would be wonderful," he says.
Though I was already home, I kept on moving eastto downtown Washington, D.C., right next to my office.
One afternoon in the fall of 2005 I walked over to interview the U.S. trade representative, Ambassador Rob Portman, whose aide, Amy M. Wilkinson, a White House fellow, told me the most unusual flat-world story.
The United States and Oman had just completed negotiations on a free-trade agreement to eliminate tariffs and trade barriers between the two nations.
What was unusual, though, was that Portman sealed the deal via a vidoconfrence with THE WORLD IS FLAT Maqbool Bin Ali Sultan, Oman's minister of commerce and industry, who participated virtually from Muscat, the country's capital.
What could be flatter, I asked myself, than a free-trade agreement sealed using flat-screen TVs?
Ms. Wilkinson later filled me in: "There were approximately 30 press folks in our conference room with note books in hand.
Ambassador Portman stood at a podium in the front of the room.
His image was projected on a digital vidoconfrence dual screen.
[The] Omani minister of commerce and industry and a roundtable of Omani press were projected on the other half of the screen.
Ambassador Portman gave remarks.
The Omani minister gave remarks.
The session was then opened for questions.
The U.S. press peppered Portman with questions.
We broke and asked if the Omanis had questions.
They asked questions of their minister.
Then the crossover began when a U.S. re porter asked both Ambassador Portman and Minister Maqbool Bin Ali Sultan a question together.
The exchange continued with U.S. press ask ing the Omani minister questions and vice versa.
The meeting ended with Portman [on one side of the screen] extending his hand in a Virtual handshake.'
The Omani minister [on the other] did the same.
It looked a bit funny and got a few chuckles but seemed to work for everyone.
The process included more people than if teams had traveled in either direc tion.
Connecting digitally eliminated a tremendous amount of wear and tear and seemed to satisfy everyone around the Virtual table.'"
I recalled that virtual deal signing one day months later when I tele phoned my stockbroker, Mark Madden at UBS, and he put me on hold.
While I was waiting, a commercial for UBS played over and over.
It noted that global markets today were more accessible and intercon nected than ever beforeand that, because of this change, UBS services were now available in "only" two locations: "Everywhere, and right next to you."
As UBS explained in the commercial: "Because financial solutions have no borders or boundaries, UBS puts investment analysts in markets across the globe.
We have specialists worldwide in wealth management, asset management, and investment banking.
So your UBS financial ad viser can draw on a network of resources to provide you with an appro priate solutionand shrink the world to a manageable size."
WHILE I WAS SLEEPING I loved that concept of a company with only two offices"everywhere, and right next to you" because it captured perfectly the way the flat tening of the world allows companies to be more global than ever and, yet, at the same time, more personal than ever.
Some of the signs of flattening back home, though, had nothing to do with economics.
A month before the 2004 election I had appeared on the CBS News Sunday morning show Face the Nation, hosted by veteran correspondent Bob Schieffer.
CBS had been in the news a lot in previ ous weeks because of Dan Rather's 60 Minutes report about President George W. Bush's Air National Guard service that turned out to be based on bogus documents.
After the show that Sunday, Schieffer mentioned that the oddest thing had happened to him the week before.
When he walked out of the CBS studio, a young reporter was waiting for him on the sidewalk.
This isn't all that unusual, because as with all the Sundaymorning shows, the major networksCBS, NBC, ABC, CNN, and Foxalways send crews to one another's studios to grab exit interviews with the guests.
But this young man, Schieffer explained, was not from a major network.
He politely introduced himself as a reporter for a Web site called InDC Journal and asked whether he could ask Schieffer a few questions.
Schieffer, being a polite fellow, said sure.
The young man in terviewed him on a device Schieffer did not recognize and then asked if he could take his picture.
A picture?
Schieffer noticed that the young man had no camera.
He didn't need one.
He turned his cell phone around and snapped Schieffer's picture.
"So I came in the next morning and looked up this Web site and there was my picture and the interview and there were already three hundred comments about it," said Schieffer, who, though keenly aware of online journalism, was nevertheless taken aback at the incredibly fast, low-cost, and solo manner in which this young man had put him up in lights.
I was intrigued by this story, so I tracked down the young man from InDC Journal.
His name is Bill Ardolino, and he is a very thoughtful guy.
I conducted my own interview with him onlinehow else?and began by asking about what equipment he was using as a one-man network/ newspaper.
"I used a minuscule MP3 player/digital recorder (three and a half THE WORLD IS FLAT inches by two inches) to get the recording, and a separate small digital camera phone to snap his picture," said Ardolino.
"Not quite as sexy as an all-in-one phone/camera/recorder (which does exist), but a statement on the ubiquity and miniaturization of technology nonetheless.
I carry this equipment around D.C. at all times because, hey, you never know.
What's perhaps more startling is how well Mr. Schieffer thought on his feet, after being jumped on by some stranger with interview questions.
He blew me away."
Ardolino said the MP3 player cost him about $125.
It is "primarily designed to play music," he explained, but it also "comes prepackaged as a digital recorder that creates a WAV sound file that can be uploaded back to a computer... Basically, I'd say that the barrier to entry to do journalism that requires portable, ad hoc recording equipment, is [now] about $ 1 0 0 - $ 2 0 0 to $300 if you add a camera, $400 to $500 for a pretty nice recorder and a pretty nice camera.
[But] $200 is all that you need to get the job done."
What prompted him to become his own news network?
"Being an independent journalist is a hobby that sprang from my frustration about biased, incomplete, selective, and/or incompetent in formation gathering by the mainstream media," explained Ardolino, who describes himself as a "center-right libertarian."
"Independent jour nalism and its relative, blogging, are expressions of market forcesa need is not being met by current information sources.
I started taking pictures and doing interviews of the antiwar rallies in D .
C , because the media was grossly misrepresenting the nature of the groups that were or ganizing the gatheringsunrepentant Marxists, explicit and implicit supporters of terror, etc.
I originally chose to use humor as a device, but I've since branched out.
Do I have more power, power to get my message out, yes.
The Schieffer interview actually brought in about twenty-five thousand visits in twenty-four hours.
My peak day since I've started was fifty-five thousand when I helped break 'Rathergate'...
I interviewed the first forensics expert in the Dan Rather National Guard story, and he was then specifically picked up by The Washington Post, Chicago Sun-Times, Globe, NYT, etc., within forty-eight hours.
"The pace of information gathering and correction in the CBS fake WHILE I WAS SLEEPING memo story was astounding," he continued.
"It wasn't just that CBS News 'stonewalled' after the fact, it was arguably that they couldn't keep up with an army of dedicated fact-checkers.
The speed and openness of the medium is something that runs rings around the old process .
I'm a twenty-nine-year-old marketing manager [who] always wanted to write for a living but hated the AP style book.
As iiberblogger Glenn Reynolds likes to say, blogs have given the people a chance to stop yelling at their TV and have a say in the process.
I think that they serve as sort of a 'fifth estate' that works in conjunction with the mainstream media (often by keeping an eye on them or feeding them raw info) and potentially func tion as a journalism and commentary farm system that provides a new means to establish success.
"Like many facets of the topic that you're talking about in your book, there are good and bad aspects of the development.
The splintering of me dia makes for a lot of incoherence or selective cognition (look at our coun try's polarization), but it also decentralizes power and provides a better guarantee that the complete truth is out there .
somewhere .
in pieces."
On any given day one can come across stories like that one stories that tell you that old hierarchies are being flattened, that the playing field is being leveled, and that people who understand this transformation can wield more power than ever.
I was shuffling through the June 25, 2005, edition of the Financial Times when a headline caught my eye: "Google Lures More Talent."
The article seemed straightforward enough, detail ing how Google had managed to hire legendary technologist Louis Monier away from eBay, where he was heading advanced technology.
But I was brought up short by a paragraph in the middle of the article: "Mr. Monier revealed his motives [for leaving eBay] in an e-mail ex change with blogger John Battelle, who spread the news on his website, battellemedia.com."
In other words, a top blogger whose expertise is Google broke the story, and the giant Financial Times had to quote his one-man Web site to be on top of the story itself.
Micah L. Sifry, an expert on the interplay of politics and technol ogy, summarized the phenomenon well in an essay in The Nation (No vember 22, 2004): "The era of top-down politicswhere campaigns, institutions and journalism were cloistered communities powered by hard- THE WORLD IS FLAT to-amass capital is over.
Something wilder, more engaging and infinitely more satisfying to individual participants is arising alongside the old order."
I offer the Schieffer-Ardolino and Financial Times cases as just two examples of how the flattening of the world has happened faster and changed rules, roles, and relationships more quickly than social science can capture.
And, though I know it is a clich, I have to say it neverthe less: You aint seen nothin yet.
As I detail in the next chapter, we are en tering a phase where we are going to see the digitization, virtualization, and automation of more and more everything.
The gains in productivity will be staggering for those countries, companies, and individuals who can absorb the new technological tools.
And we are entering a phase where more people than ever before in the history of the world are going to have access to these toolsas innovators, as collaborators, and, alas, even as terrorists.
You say you want a revolution?
Well, the real informa tion revolution is about to begin.
I call this new phase Globalization 3.0 because it followed Globalization 2.0, but I think this new era of global ization will prove to be such a difference of degree that it will be seen, in time, as a difference in kind.
That is why I introduced the idea that the world has gone from round to flat.
Everywhere you turn, hierarchies are being challenged from below or are transforming themselves from topdown structures into more horizontal and collaborative ones. "
'Globalization' is the word we came up with to describe the chang ing relationships between governments and big businesses," said David Rothkopf, a former senior Department of Commerce official in the Clinton administration and now a private strategic consultant.
"But what is going on today is a much broader, much more profound phenome non."
It is not simply about how governments, business, and people com municate, not just about how organizations interact, but is about the emergence of completely new social, political, and business models.
"It is about things that impact some of the deepest, most ingrained aspects of society right down to the nature of the social contract," added Rothkopf.
"What happens if the political entity in which you are located no longer corresponds to a job that takes place in cyberspace, or no longer really encompasses workers collaborating with other workers in different corners of the globe, or no longer really captures products pro- WHILE I WAS SLEEPING duced in multiple places simultaneously?
Who regulates the work?
Who taxes it?
Who should benefit from those taxes?"
I am convinced that the flattening of the world, if it continues, will be seen in time as one of those fundamental shifts or inflection points, like Gutenberg's invention of the printing press, the rise of the nation-state, or the Industrial Revolutioneach of which, in its day, noted Rothkopf, produced changes in the role of individuals, the role and form of gov ernments, the ways business was done and wars were fought, the role of women, the forms religion and art took, and the way science and re search were conducted, not to mention the political labels that we as a civilization have assigned to ourselves and to our enemies.
"There are certain pivot points or watersheds in history that are greater than others because the changes they produced were so sweeping, multifaceted, and hard to predict at the time," Rothkopf said.
If the prospect of this flatteningand all of the pressures, disloca tions, and opportunities accompanying itmakes you uneasy about the future, you are neither wrong nor alone.
Whenever civilization has gone through a major technological revolution, the world has changed in pro found and unsettling ways.
But there is something about the flattening of the world that is going to be qualitatively different from the great changes of previous eras: the speed and breadth with which it is taking hold.
The introduction of printing happened over a period of decades and for a long time affected only a relatively small part of the planet.
Same with the Industrial Revolution.
This flattening process is happening at warp speed and directly or indirectly touching a lot more people on the planet at once.
The faster and broader this transition to a new era, the greater the potential for disruption, as opposed to an orderly transfer of power from the old winners to the new winners.
To put it another way, the experiences of the high-tech companies in the last few decades that failed to navigate the rapid changes brought about in their marketplace by these types of forces may be a warning to all the businesses, institutions, and nation-states that are now facing these inevitable, even predictable, changes but lack the leadership, flexibility, and imagination to adaptnot because they are not smart or aware, but because the speed of change is simply overwhelming them.
THE WORLD IS FLAT And that is why the great challenge for our time will be to absorb these changes in ways that do not overwhelm people or leave them be hind.
None of this will be easy.
But this is our task.
It is inevitable and un avoidable.
It is the ambition of this book to offer a framework for how to think about this task and manage it to our maximum benefit.
I have shared with you in this chapter how I personally discovered that the world is flat.
The next chapter details how it got that way.
TWO The Ten Forces That Flattened the World T he Bible tells us that God created the world in six days and on the seventh day he rested.
Flattening the world took a little longer.
The world has been flattened by the convergence of ten major political events, innovations, and companies.
None of us has rested since, or maybe ever will again.
This chapter is about the ten forces that flattened the world and the multiple new forms and tools for collaboration that this flattening has created.
I'l.ATiKNKR // 11/9/89 The New Age of Creativity: When the Walls Came Down and the Windows Went Up T he first time I saw the Berlin Wall, it already had a hole in it.
It was December 1990, and I was traveling to Berlin with the re porters covering secretary of state James A. Baker III.
The Berlin Wall had been breached a year earlier, on November 9, 1989.
Yes, in a won derful kabalistic accident of dates, the Berlin Wall fell on 11/9.
The wall, even in its punctured and broken state, was still an ugly scar across Berlin.
Secretary Baker was making his first visit to see this crumbled monument to Soviet communism.
I was standing next to him with a small group of reporters.
"It was a foggy, overcast day," Baker recalled in THE WORLD IS FLAT his memoir, The Politics of Diplomacy, "and in my raincoat, I felt like a character in a John le Carr novel.
But as I peered through a crack in the Wall [near the Reichstag] and saw the high-resolution drabness that characterizes East Berlin, I realized that the ordinary men and women of East Germany, peacefully and persistently, had taken matters into their own hands.
This was their revolution."
After Baker finished looking through the wall and moved along, we reporters took turns peering through the same jagged concrete hole.
I brought a couple of chunks of the wall home for my daughters.
I remember thinking how unnatural it lookedindeed, what a bizarre thing it was, this cement wall snaking across a modern city for the sole purpose of preventing the people on the other side from enjoying, even glimpsing, freedom.
The fall of the Berlin Wall on 11/9/89 unleashed forces that ulti mately liberated all the captive peoples of the Soviet Empire.
But it ac tually did so much more.
It tipped the balance of power across the world toward those advocating democratic, consensual, free-market-oriented governance, and away from those advocating authoritarian rule with centrally planned economies.
The Cold War had been a struggle be tween two economic systemscapitalism and communismand with the fall of the wall, there was only one system left and everyone had to orient himself or herself to it one way or another.
Henceforth, more and more economies would be governed from the ground up, by the inter ests, demands, and aspirations of the people, rather than from the top down, by the interests of some narrow ruling clique.
Within two years, there was no Soviet Empire to hide behind anymore or to prop up auto cratic regimes in Asia, the Middle East, Africa, or Latin America.
If you were not a democracy or a democratizing society, if you continued to hold fast to highly regulated or centrally planned economics, you were seen as being on the wrong side of history.
For some, particularly among the older generations, this was an un welcome transformation.
Communism was a great system for making people equally poor.
In fact, there was no better system in the world for that than communism.
Capitalism made people unequally rich, and for some who were used to the plodding, limited, but secure Socialist lifestylewhere a job, a house, an education, and a pension were all THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD guaranteed, even if they were meagerthe fall of the Berlin Wall was deeply unsettling.
But for many others, it was a get-out-of-jail-free card.
That is why the fall of the Berlin Wall was felt in so many more places than just Berlin, and why its fall was such a world-flattening event.
Indeed, to appreciate the far-reaching flattening effects of the fall of the Berlin Wall, it's always best to talk to non-Germans or non-Russians.
Tarun Das was heading the Confederation of Indian Industry when the wall fell in Berlin, and he saw its ripple effect felt all the way to India.
"We had this huge mass of regulation and controls and bureaucracy," he recalled.
"Nehru had come to power [after the end of British colonial rule] and had a huge country to manage, and no experience of running a country.
The U.S. was busy with Europe and Japan and the Marshall Plan.
So Nehru looked north, across the Himalayas, and sent his team of economists to Moscow.
They came back and said that this country [the Soviet Union] was amazing.
They allocate resources, they give licenses, there is a planning commission that decides everything, and the country moves.
So we took that model and forgot that we had a private sector .
That private sector got put under this wall of regulation.
By 1991, the pri vate sector was there, but under wraps, and there was mistrust about busi ness.
They made profits!
The entire infrastructure from 1947 to 1991 was government-owned .
[The burden of state ownership] almost bank rupted the country.
We were not able to pay our debts... Sure, we might have won a couple of wars with Pakistan, but that did not give the nation confidence."
In 1991, with India running out of hard currency, Manmohan Singh, the finance minister at that time (and now the prime minister), decided that India had to open its economy.
"Our Berlin Wall fell," said Das, "and it was like unleashing a caged tiger.
Trade controls were abolished.
We were always at 3 percent growth, the so-called Hindu rate of growthslow, cautious, and conservative.
To make [better returns], you had to go to America.
Well, three years later [after the 1991 reforms] we were at 7 percent rate of growth.
To hell with poverty!
Now to make it you could stay in India and become one of Forbes s richest people in the world .
All the years of socialism and controls had taken us downhill to the point where we had only $1 billion in foreign currency.
Today we THE WORLD IS FLAT have $118 billion .
We went from quiet self-confidence to outrageous ambition in a decade."
The fall of the Berlin Wall didn't just help flatten the alternatives to free-market capitalism and unlock enormous pent-up energies for hun dreds of millions of people in places like India, Brazil, China, and the former Soviet Empire.
It also allowed us to think about the world differ entlyto see it as more of a seamless whole.
Because the Berlin Wall was not only blocking our way; it was blocking our sightour ability to think about the world as a single market, a single ecosystem, and a single com munity.
Before 1989, you could have an Eastern policy or a Western pol icy, but it was hard to think about having a "global" policy.
Amartya Sen, the Nobel Prize-winning Indian economist now teaching at Harvard, once remarked to me that "the Berlin Wall was not only a symbol of keep ing people inside East Germanyit was a way of preventing a kind of global view of our future.
We could not think globally about the world when the Berlin Wall was there.
We could not think about the world as a whole."
There is a lovely story in Sanskrit, Sen added, about a frog that is born in a well and stays in the well and lives its entire life in the well.
"It has a worldview that consists of the well," he said.
"That was what the world was like for many people on the planet before the fall of the wall.
When it fell, it was like the frog in the well was suddenly able to commu nicate with frogs in all the other wells .
If I celebrate the fall of the wall, it is because I am convinced of how much we can learn from each other.
Most knowledge is learning from the other across the border."
Yes, the world became a better place to live in after 11/9, because each outbreak of freedom stimulated another outbreak, and that process in and of itself had a flattening effect across societies, strengthening those below and weakening those above.
"Women's freedom," noted Sen, cit ing just one example, "which promotes women's literacy, tends to reduce fertility and child mortality and increase the employment opportunities for women, which then affects the political dialogue and gives women the opportunity for a greater role in local self-government."
Finally, the fall of the wall did not just open the way for more people to tap into one another's knowledge pools.
It also paved the way for the THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD adoption of common standardsstandards on how economies should be run, on how accounting should be done, on how banking should be conducted, on how PCs should be made, and on how economics papers should be written.
I discuss this more later, but suffice it to say here that common standards create a flatter, more level playing field.
To put it an other way, the fall of the wall enhanced the free movement of best prac tices.
When an economic or technological standard emerged and proved itself on the world stage, it was much more quickly adopted after the wall was out of the way.
In Europe alone, the fall of the wall opened the way for the formation of the European Union and its expansion from fifteen to twenty-five countries.
That, in combination with the advent of the euro as a common currency, has created a single economic zone out of a region once divided by an Iron Curtain.
While the positive effects of the wall coming down were immediately apparent, the cause of the wall's fall was not so clear.
There was no single cause.
To some degree the termites just ate away at the foundations of the Soviet Union, which were already weakened by the system's own inter nal contradictions and inefficiencies; to some degree the Reagan admin istration's military buildup in Europe forced the Kremlin to bankrupt itself paying for warheads; and to some degree Mikhail Gorbachev's fu tile efforts to reform something that was unreformable brought commu nism to an end.
But if I had to point to one factor as first among equals, it was the information revolution that began in the early to mid-1980s.
Totalitarian systems depend on a monopoly of information and force, and too much information started to slip through the Iron Curtain, thanks to the spread of fax machines, telephones, and, eventually, the personal computer.
Following the pioneering release of the Apple II home computer by Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak in 1977, the first IBM PC (personal com puter) hit the markets in 1981.
Thefirstversion of the Windows operating system launched in 1985, and the breakthrough version that made IBM PCs much more user-friendlyWindows 3.0shipped on May 22, 1990, only six months after the wall went down.
While the fall of the wall eliminated a physical and geopolitical barrierone that held back THE WORLD IS FLAT information, stood in the way of shared standards, and kept us from having a view of the world as a single unified communitythe rise of the Windows-enabled PC, which really popularized personal computing, eliminated another hugely important barrier: the limit on the amount of information that any single individual could amass, author, manipulate, and diffuse.
"The Windows-powered PC enabled millions of individuals, for the first time ever, to become authors of their own content in digital form, which meant that content could be shared far and wide," explained Craig J. Mundie, a chief technical officer for Microsoft.
Over time the AppleIBM-Windows revolution enabled the digital representation of all the important forms of expressionwords, music, numeric data, maps, photographs, and eventually voice and video.
It also, said Mundie, "cre ated an army of people able to create this digital content more easily and cheaply than ever beforefrom their desktops, kitchens, bedrooms, and basements instead of being required to access a big mainframe com puter that was largely restricted for business purposes."
Suddenly ordinary people could get the benefit of computing without being programmers.
It is impossible to exaggerate how important this was to the flattening of the world.
The rise of the Windows-enabled PC, combined with the fall of the Wall, set in motion the whole flattening process.
To be sure, men and women have long been authoring their own content, begin ning with drawings on cave walls up through Gutenberg and the type writer.
But the Windows-enabled PCs and Apples made it possible for individuals to author their own content right from their desktops in digi tal form.
And those last three words are critical.
Because once people could author their own content in digital form in the form of computer bits and bytesthey could manipulate it on computer screens in ways that made individuals so much more productive.
And with the steady ad vances in telecommunications, they would soon be able to disseminate their own digital content in so many new ways to so many more people.
Think of what one person can do with pen and paper.
Think of what one person can do with a typewriter.
And then think of what one person can now do with a PC.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD One of Bill Gates's early mottoes for Microsoft, which he cofounded, was that the company's goal was to give every individual "IAYF"  information at your fingertips.
When I said earlier that this era of Globalization 3.0 is about individuals globalizing themselves, that was largely made possible by the Apple and Windows-enabled IBM PCs and their many clones.
They are the tools that gave individuals the power to author, shape, and disseminate information at their fingertips.
"People said, 'Wow, there is an asset here, and we should take advan tage of it,'" said Microsoft's Mundie.
And the more established Windows became as the primary operating system, "the more programmers went out and wrote applications for rich-world businesses to put on their com puters, so they could do lots of new and different business tasks, which started to enhance productivity even more.
Tens of millions of people around the world became programmers to make the PC do whatever they wanted in their own languages.
Windows was eventually translated into thirty-eight languages [with more being added all the time].
People were able to become familiar with the PC in their own languages."
In this same time period, some people other than scientists started to dis cover that if they bought a PC and a dial-up modem, they could connect their PCs to their telephones and send e-mails through private Internet ser vice providerslike CompuServe and America Online.
"The diffusion of personal computers, fax machines, Windows, and dial-up modems con nected to a global telephone network all came together in the late 1980s and early 1990s to create the basic platform that started the global informa tion revolution," argued Mundie.
The key was the melding of them all together into a single interoperable system.
That happened, said Mundie, once we had in crude form a standardized computing platformthe IBM PCalong with a standardized graphical user interface for word pro cessing and spreadsheetsWindowsalong with a standardized tool for communicationdial-up modems and the global phone network.
Once we had that basic interoperable platform, then the killer applications spreadsheets and word processingdrove its diffusion far and wide.
And once more and more people connected their Windows-enabled PCs with that global communications platform, which spread even THE WORLD IS FLAT more quickly after 1989, when the Berlin Wall came down (and China and India started opening to the global economy), there was nothing to stop the digital representation of everythingwords, music, photos, data, video and then the global exchange of all that digital informa tion.
The political constraint on individual reach collapsed with the fall of the Berlin Wall (though of course large swaths of repression still ex ist), and the practical constraint on individual reach collapsed with the rise of the Apple and Windows-enabled, modem-connected IBM PC.
This coincidental breakthrough suddenly gave individuals in this flat tening world both reach and scalereach because they could create content in so many new and different ways and scale because they could share their content with so many more people.
As new and exciting as this breakthrough was compared to what ex isted before, it was nothing compared to what would come later.
"This [initial] platform was constrained by too many architectural limits," said Mundie.
"There was missing infrastructure."
The Internet as we know it todaywith seemingly magical transmission protocols that can connect everyone and everythinghad not yet emerged.
Back then, networks had only very basic protocols for exchanging files and e-mail messages.
Yes, AOL users could communicate with CompuServe users, but it was nei ther simple nor reliable.
People could write new applications that allowed selected systems to work together, but in general this was limited to planned exchanges between PCs within the network of a single company.
As a result, said Mundie, "a huge amount of data and creativity was accu mulating in all those computers," but there was no easy, interoperable way to share it and mold it.
Nevertheless, this period from 11/9 to the mid-1990s led to a huge ad vance in personal empowerment.
Looking back, one can say that it was the age of "Me and my machine can now talk to each other better and faster, so that I personally can do more tasks" and the age of "Me and my machine can now talk to a few friends and some other people in my company better and faster, so we can become more productive."
As I said, this level of connectivity surely helped to put the nail in the coffin of communism, because the very tools that were being used to im prove productivity in the West (PCs, faxes, modems), even though much THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD scarcer in the East, vastly improved horizontal person-to-person commu nication there, to the detriment of top-down Communist systems.
Though we didn't notice it at the time, there was a discordant note in this exciting new era.
It wasn't only Americans and Europeans who joined the people of the Soviet Empire in celebrating the fall of the walland claiming credit for it.
Someone else was raising a glassnot of champagne but of thick Turkish coffee.
His name was Osama bin Laden and he had a different narrative.
His view was that it was the jihadi fighters in Af ghanistan, of which he was one, who had brought down the Soviet Em pire by forcing the Red Army to withdraw from Afghanistan (with some help from U.S. and Pakistani forces).
And once that mission had been accomplishedthe Soviets completed their pullout from Afghanistan on February 15, 1989, just nine months before the fall of the Berlin W a l l bin Laden looked around and found that the other superpower, the United States, had a huge presence in his own native land, Saudi Arabia, the home of the two holiest cities in Islam.
And he did not like it.
So, while we were dancing on the Wall, savoring our Apples, open ing up our Windows, and proclaiming that there was no ideological alternative to free-market capitalism, bin Laden was turning his gunsights on America.
Both bin Laden and Ronald Reagan saw the Soviet Union as the "evil empire," but bin Laden came to see the United States as evil too.
He did have an ideological alternative to freemarket capitalismpolitical Islam.
He did not feel defeated by the end of the Soviet Union; he felt emboldened by it.
He did not feel attracted to the widened playing field; he felt repelled by it.
And he was not alone.
Some people thought that Ronald Reagan had brought down the wall by bankrupting the USSR through an arms race; others thought IBM, Steve Jobs, and Bill Gates had brought down the wall by empowering individuals to download the future.
But a world away, in Muslim lands, many thought bin Laden and his comrades had brought down the Soviet Empire and the Wall through religious zeal, and mil lions of them were inspired to upload the past.
In short, while we were celebrating 11/9, the seeds of another mem orable date9/11were being sown.
But more about that later in the book.
For now, let the flattening continue.
THE WORLD IS FLAT I, ATT 1 , \ I, R 8/9/95 The New Age of Connectivity: When the Web Went Around and Netscape Went Public B y the mid-1990s, the PC-Windows era had reached a plateau.
It was wonderful that people all over the world could suddenly author their own content in digital form.
But if we were really going to make the most of this breakthrough, we needed a breakthrough in connectivityone that would allow each of us to take our digital content and send it any where at very little cost, so that others could share it and work on it with us.
The "event" that made that happen was actually a coincidence of events that took place in the space of just a few years in the 1990sthe emergence of the Internet as a tool of low-cost global connectivity; the emergence, on top of the Internet, of the World Wide Web as a seem ingly magical virtual realm where individuals could post their digital content for everyone else to access; and, finally, the spread of the com mercial Web browser, which could retrieve documents or Web pages stored in Web sites and display them on any computer screen in such a simple manner that everyone wouldand didwant to use it.
This sud den revolution in connectivity constituted a major flattening force.
The concept of a World Wide Weba system for creating, organiz ing, and linking documents so they could be easily browsed over the Internetwas developed by British computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee.
Berners-Lee is someone who certainly helped to flatten the world.
While consulting for CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research in Switzerland, he created the World Wide Web and posted thefirstWeb site in 1991.
It was part of an effort to foster a computer network that would enable scientists to share their research more easily.
The telephone and the modem made it possible to establish physical connections be tween all the world's PCs.
But all that the modem and phone line did was connect you to the Internet.
Unless you knew how to manually drive around the Internet to find things, it was not all that exciting.
Yes, there were emerging e-mail systems and networks to communicate with on the THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Internet, but sharing data was really rudimentarybecause there were no Web sites or Web pages or Web browsers to bring to life the data in other people's computers, and worse, no easy way to navigate to them.
The first big breakthrough to bring the Internet alive as a tool of con nectivity and collaborationa tool that anyone, not just computer geeks, could usewas Berners-Lee's World Wide Web.
Although people often use the terms "World Wide Web" and "Internet" interchangeably, they are not the same.
As Berners-Lee himself explains on his own Web site: "The Internet ('Net) is a network of networks.
Basically it is made from computers and cables.
What Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn [the inventors of the Internet] did was to figure out how this could be used to send around little packets' of information .
That's what the Internet does.
It delivers packetsanywhere in the world, normally in well under a second.
Lots .
of programs use the Internet: electronic mail, for example, was around long before the global hypertext system I invented and called the World Wide Web."
And what is the World Wide Web?
What is this amazing cyberspace that has become a kind of parallel universe?
Berners-Lee explains: "The Web is an abstract (imaginary) space of information.
On the Net, you find computers on the Web, you find documents, sounds, videos.
information.
On the Net, the connections are cables between comput ers; on the Web, connections are hypertext links.
The Web exists be cause of programs which communicate between computers on the Net.
The Web could not be without the Net.
The Web made the Net useful because people are really interested in information (not to mention knowledge and wisdom!)
and don't really want to have to know about computers and cables."
ThefirstWeb site Berners-Lee created (and therefore thefirstWeb site ever) was at http://info.cern.ch and was first put up on August 6, 1991.
It explained how the World Wide Web worked, how one could own a browser, how to go about setting up a Web server.
Time magazine (June 14, 1999), in profiling Berners-Lee as one of the one hundred most im portant people of the twentieth century, summed up his creation of the World Wide Web this way: "Thomas Edison got credit for the light bulb, but he had dozens of people in his lab working on it.
William THE WORLD IS FLAT Shockley may have fathered the transistor, but two of his research scien tists actually built it.
And if there ever was a thing that was made by com mittee, the Internetwith its protocols and packet switchingis it.
But the World Wide Web is Berners-Lee's alone.
He designed i t .
And he .
fought to keep it open, nonproprietary and free."
He popularized "a relatively easy-to-learn coding systemHTML (hypertext markup language) that has come to be the lingua franca of the Web; it's the way Web-content creators put those little colored, underlined links in their text, add images and so on.
He designed an addressing scheme that gave each Web page a unique location, or url (universal resource locator).
And he hacked a set of rules that permitted these documents to be linked together on computers across the Internet.
He called that set of rules HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol).
And on the seventh day, BernersLee cobbled together the World Wide Web's first (but not the last) browser, which allowed users anywhere to view his creation on their computer screen.
In 1991 the World Wide Web debuted, instantly bring ing order and clarity to the chaos that was cyberspace.
From that mo ment on, the Web and the Internet grew as one, often at exponential rates.
Within five years, the number of Internet users jumped from 600,000 to 40 million.
At one point, it was doubling every 53 days."
A s hugely important as Berners-Lee's invention was, what really pop ularized the Internet and the Web as tools of both connectivity and commerce was the creation of easy-to-install and easy-to-use commercial browsers.
After Berners-Lee, other scientists and academics created a number of browsers to surf this early Web, but the first widely popular commercial browserand the whole culture of Web browsing for the general publicwas created by a tiny start-up company in Mountain View, California, called Netscape.
Netscape went public on August 9, 1995, and the world has not been the same since.
As John Doerr, the legendary venture capitalist whose firm Kleiner Perkins Caulfield & Byers had backed Netscape, put it, "The Netscape IPO was a clarion call to the world to wake up to the Internet.
Until then, it had been the province of the early adopters and geeks."
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Netscape was a huge flattening force for several reasons.
To begin with, the Netscape browser not only brought the Internet alive but also made the Internet accessible to everyone from five-year-olds to ninetyfive-year-olds.
The more alive the Internet became, the more different people wanted to do different things on the Web, so the more they de manded computers, software, and telecommunications networks that could easily digitize words, music, data, and photos and transport them on the Internet to anyone else's computer.
This demand was satisfied by another catalytic event: the rollout of Windows 95, which shipped fif teen days after Netscape took its stock public.
Windows 95 would soon become the operating system used by most people worldwide, and un like previous versions of Windows, it was equipped with built-in Internet support, so that not just browsers but all PC applications could "know about the Internet" and interact with it.
Looking back, what enabled Netscape to take off was the existence, from the earlier phase, of millions of PCs, many already equipped with modems.
Those are the shoulders Netscape stood on.
What Netscape did was bring a new killer appthe browserto this installed base of PCs, making the computer and its connectivity inherently more useful for millions of people.
This in turn set off an explosion in demand for all things digital and sparked the Internet boom, because every investor looked at the Internet and concluded that if everything was going to be digitized data, inventories, commerce, books, music, photos, and en tertainmentand transported and sold on the Internet, then the de mand for Internet-based products and services would be infinite.
This led to the dot-com stock bubble and a massive overinvestment in the fiber-optic cable needed to carry all the new digital information.
This de velopment, in turn, wired the whole world together, and, without any one really planning it, made Bangalore a suburb of Boston.
Let's look at each one of these developments.
W hen I sat down with Jim Barksdale, the former Netscape C E O , to interview him for this book, I explained to him that one of the early chapters was about the ten innovations, events, and trends that had THE WORLD IS FLAT flattened the world.
The first event, I told him, was 11/9, and I explained the significance of that date.
Then I said, "Let me see if you can guess the significance of the second date, 8/9."
That was all I told him: 8/9.
It took Barksdale only a second to ponder that before shooting back with the right answer: "The day Netscape went public!"
Few would deny that Barksdale is one of the great American entre preneurs.
He helped Federal Express develop its package tracking and tracing system, then moved over to McCaw Cellular, the mobile phone company, built that up, and oversaw its merger with AT&T in 1994.
Just before the sale closed, he was approached by a headhunter to become the C E O of a new company called Mosaic Communications, forged by two now-legendary innovatorsJim Clark and Marc Andreessen.
In mid-1994, Clark, the founder of Silicon Graphics, had joined forces with Andreessen to found Mosaic, which would quickly be renamed Netscape Communications.
Andreessen, a brilliant young computer sci entist, had just spearheaded a small software project at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA), based at the Univer sity of Illinois, that developed the first really effective, easy-to-use Web browser, also called Mosaic.
Clark and Andreessen quickly understood the huge potential for Web-browsing software and decided to partner up to commercialize it.
As Netscape began to grow, they reached out to Barksdale for guidance and insight into how best to go public.
Today we take this simplified browser technology for granted, but it was actually one of the most important inventions in modern history.
When Andreessen was back at the University of Illinois NCSA lab, he found that he had PCs, workstations, and the basic network connectivity to move files around the Internet, but it was still not very exciting because there was no simple, evocative user interface to pull up and dis play the contents of other people's Web sites.
So, as Wikipedia recounts, Andreessen and a full-time salaried coworker, Eric Bina, started devel oping a user-friendly browser "with integrated graphics that would work on a wide range of computers.
The resulting code was the Mosaic Web browser.
Andreessen was fastidious in monitoring and responding to all user comments for suggestions and improvements to the browser, which fueled its accessibility and its popularity."
Mosaic, in short, made Web THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD sites viewable by any idiot, scientist, student, kindergartener, or grandma or grandpa.
Marc Andreessen did not invent the Internet or the World Wide Web, but he certainly played a historic role in helping to bring them alive and make them easily usable tools.
"The Mosaic browser started out in 1993 with twelve users, and I knew all twelve," said Andreessen.
There were only about fifty Web sites at the time and they were mostly just single Web pages.
"Mosaic," he explained, "was funded by the National Science Foundation.
The money wasn't ac tually allocated to build Mosaic.
Our specific group was to build software that would enable scientists to use supercomputers that were in remote lo cations, and to connect to them by the NSF network.
So we built [the first browsers as] software tools to enable researchers to 'browse' each other's re search.
I looked at it as a positive feedback loop: The more people had the browser, the more people would want to be interconnected, and the more incentive there would be to create content and applications and tools.
Once that kind of thing gets started, it just takes off and virtually nothing can stop it.
When you are developing it, you are not sure anyone is going to use it, but once it started we realized that if anyone is going to use it everyone is going to use it, and the only question then was how fast it would spread and what would be the barriers along the way."
Indeed, everyone who tried the browser, including Barksdale, had the same initial reaction: Wow.'
"Every summer, Fortune magazine had an article about the twenty-five coolest companies around," Barksdale re called.
"That year [1994] Mosaic was one of them.
I not only had read about Clark and Andreessen but had turned to my wife and said, 'Honey, this a great idea.'
And then just a few weeks later I get this call from the headhunter.
So I went down and spoke to Doerr and Jim Clark, and I be gan using the beta version of the Mosaic browser.
I became more and more intrigued the more I used it."
Since the late 1980s, people had been putting up databases with Internet access.
Barksdale said that after speaking to Doerr and Clark, he went home, gathered his three children around his computer, and asked them each to suggest a topic he could browse the Internet forand wowed them by coming up with some thing for each of them.
"That convinced me," said Barksdale.
"So I called back the headhunter and said, 'I'm your man.'"
THE WORLD IS FLAT Netscape's first commercial browserwhich could work on an IBM PC, an Apple Macintosh, or a Unix computerwas released in Decem ber 1994, and within a year it completely dominated the market.
You could download Netscape for free if you were in education or a non profit.
If you were an individual, you could evaluate the software for free to your heart's content and buy it on disk if you wanted it.
If you were a company, you could evaluate the software for ninety days.
"The under lying rationale," said Andreessen, "was: If you can afford to pay for it, please do so.
If not, use it anyway."
Why?
Because all the free usage stimulated a massive growth in the network, which was valuable to all the paying customers.
It worked.
"We put up the Netscape browser," said Barksdale, "and people were downloading it for three-month trials.
I've never seen volume like this.
For big businesses and government it was allowing them to con nect and unlock all their information, and the point-and-click system that Marc Andreessen invented allowed mere mortals to use it, not just scientists.
And that made it a true revolution.
And we said, This thing will just grow and grow and grow.'"
IV Tothing did stop it, and that is why Netscape played another hugely 1 i important flattening role: It helped make the Internet truly inter operable.
You will recall that in the Berlin Wall-PC-Windows phase, individuals who had e-mail and companies that had internal e-mail could not connect very far.
The first Cisco Internet router, in fact, was built by a husband and wife at Stanford who wanted to exchange e-mail; one was working off a mainframe and the other on a PC, and they couldn't connect.
"The corporate networks at the time were proprietary and disconnected from each other," said Andreessen.
"Each one had its own formats, data protocols, and different ways of doing content.
So there were all these islands of information out there that were discon nected.
And as the Internet emerged as a public, commercial venture, there was a real danger that it would emerge in the same discon nected way."
Joe in the accounting department would get on his office PC and try THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD to get the latest sales numbers for 1995, but he couldn't do that because the sales department was on a different system from the one accounting was using.
It was as if one was speaking German and the other French.
And then Joe would say, "Get me the latest shipment information from Goodyear on what tires they have sent us," and he would find that Goodyear was using a different system altogether, and the dealer in Topeka was running yet another system.
Then Joe would go home and find his seventh grader on the World Wide Web researching a term pa per, using open protocols, and looking at the holdings of some art mu seum in France.
And Joe would say, "This is crazy.
There has to be one totally interconnected network."
In the years before the Internet became commercialized, BernersLee, Vint Cerf, Bob Kahn, and other scientists had developed a series of "open protocols" meant to make everyone's e-mail system or university computer network connect seamlessly with everyone else'sto ensure that no one had some special advantage.
These mathematical-based pro tocols, which enable digital devices to talk to one another, were like mag ical pipes that, once you adopted them for your network, made you compatible with everyone else, no matter what kind of computer they were running.
These protocols were (and still are, more or less) known by their alphabet soup names: mainly FTP, HTTP, HTML, SSL, SMTP, POP, and TCP/IP.
Together, they form a system for transporting data around the Internet and the World Wide Web in a relatively secure man ner, no matter what network your company or household has or what computer or cell phone or handheld device you are using.
Each proto col had a different function: TCP/IP was the basic plumbing of the Internet, or the basic railroad tracks, on which everything else above it was built and moved around.
FTP moved files.
SMTP and POP moved e-mail messages, which became standardized, so that they could be writ ten and read on different e-mail systems.
HTML, as noted above, al lowed ordinary people to author Web pages, and HTTP enabled people to connect to HTML documents on the World Wide Web.
Finally, as people began to use these Web pages for electronic commerce, SSL was created to provide security for Web-based transactions.
As browsing and the Internet in general grew, Netscape wanted to THE WORLD IS FLAT make sure that Microsoft, with its huge market dominance, would not be able to shift these Web protocols from open to proprietary standards that only Microsoft's servers would be able to handle.
"Netscape helped to guarantee that these open protocols would not be proprietary by com mercializing them for the public," said Andreessen.
"Netscape came along not only with the browser but with a family of software products that implemented all these open standards so that the scientists could communicate with each other no matter what system they were ona Cray supercomputer, a Macintosh, or a PC.
Netscape was able to pro vide a real reason for everyone to say, 'I want to be on open standards for everything I do and for all the systems I work on.'
Once we created a way to browse the Internet, people wanted a universal way to access what was out there.
So anyone who wanted to work on open standards went to Netscape, where we supported them, or they went to the open-source world and got the same standards for free but unsupported, or they went to their private vendors and said, 'I am not going to buy your proprietary stuff anymore .
I am not going to sign up to your walled garden any more.
I am only going to stay with you if you interconnect to the Internet with these open protocols.'
" Netscape began pushing these open standards through the sale of its browsers, and the public responded enthusiastically.
Sun started to do the same with its servers, and Microsoft started to do the same with Windows 95, considering browsing so critical that it famously built its own browser directly into Windows with the addition of Internet Ex plorer.
Each realized that the public, which suddenly could not get enough of e-mail and browsing, wanted the Internet companies to work together and create one interoperable network.
They wanted companies to compete with each other over different applications, that is, over what consumers could do once they were on the Internetnot over how they got on the Internet in the first place.
As a result, after quite a few "format wars" among the big companies, by the late 1990s the Internet comput ing platform became seamlessly integrated.
Soon anyone was able to connect with anyone else anywhere on any machine.
It turned out that the value of compatibility was much higher for everyone than the value of trying to maintain your own little private network.
This integration THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD was a huge flattener, because it enabled so many more people to get con nected with so many more other people.
There was no shortage of skeptics at the time, who said that none of this would work because it was all too complicated, recalled Andreessen.
"You had to go out and get a PC and a dial-up modem.
The skeptics all said, I t takes people a long time to change their habits and learn a new technology.'
[But] people did it very quickly, and ten years later there were eight hundred million people on the Internet."
The reason?
"People will change their habits quickly when they have a strong reason to do so, and people have an innate urge to connect with other people," said Andreessen.
"And when you give people a new way to connect with other people, they will punch through any technical barrier, they will learn new languagespeople are wired to want to connect with other people and they find it objectionable not to be able to.
That is what Netscape unlocked."
As Joel Cawley, IBM's vice president of corporate strategy, put it, "Netscape created a standard around how data would be transported and rendered on the screen that was so simple and com pelling that anyone and everyone could innovate on top of it.
It quickly scaled around the world and to everyone from kids to corporations."
In the summer of 1995, Barksdale and his Netscape colleagues went on an old-fashioned road show with their investment bankers from Morgan Stanley to try to entice investors around the country to buy Netscape stock once it went public.
"When we went out on the road," said Barksdale, "Morgan Stanley said the stock could sell for as high as $14.
But after the road show got going, they were getting such demand for the stock, they decided to double the opening price to $28.
The last afternoon before the offering, we were all in Maryland.
It was our last stop.
We had this caravan of black limousines.
We looked like some kind of Mafia group.
We needed to be in touch with Morgan Stanley [head quarters], but we were somewhere where our cell phones didn't work.
So we pulled into these two filling stations across from each other, all these black limos, to use the phones.
We called up Morgan Stanley, and they said, 'We're thinking of bringing it out at $31/1 said, 'No, let's keep it at $28,' because I wanted people to remember it as a $20 stock, not a $30 stock, just in case it didn't go so well.
So then the next morning I get on THE WORLD IS FLAT the conference call and the thing opened at $71.
It closed the day at $56, exactly twice the price I set."
Netscape eventually fell victim to overwhelming (and, the courts de cided, monopolistic) competitive pressure from Microsoft.
Microsoft's decision to give away its browser, Internet Explorer, as part of its domi nant Windows operating system, combined with its ability to invest more and better resources into Web browsing than Netscape, combined with a certain loss of focus at Netscape as it expanded so fast, led Netscape to steadily lose market share.
In the end, Netscape was sold for $10 billion to AOL, which never did much with it.
But though Netscape may have been only a shooting star in commercial terms, what a star it was, and what a trail it left.
"We were profitable almost from the start," said Barksdale.
"Netscape was not a dot-com.
We did not participate in the dot-com bubble.
We started the dot-com bubble."
A nd what a bubble it was.
"Netscape going public stimulated a lot of things," said Barksdale.
"The technologists loved the new technology things it could do, and the businesspeople and regular folks got excited about how much money they could make.
People saw all those young kids making money out of this and said, 'If those young kids can do this and make all that money, I can too.'
Greed can be a bad thingfolks thought they could make a lot of money without a lot of work.
It certainly led to a degree of overinvest ment, putting it mildly.
Every sillier and sillier idea got funded."
What was it that stimulated investors to believe that demand for Internet usage and Internet-related products would be infinite?
The short answer is digitization.
Once the PC-Windows revolution demon strated to everyone the value of being able to digitize information and manipulate it on computers and word processors, and once the browser brought the Internet alive and made Web pages sing and dance and dis play, everyone wanted everything digitized as much as possible so they could send it to someone else down the Internet pipes.
Thus began the digitization revolution.
Digitization is that magic process by which THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD words, music, data, films, files, and pictures are turned into bits and bytescombinations of Is and Osthat can be manipulated on a com puter screen, stored on a microprocessor, or transmitted over satellites and fiber-optic lines.
It used to be the post office was where I went to send my mail, but once the Internet came alive, I wanted my mail digi tized so I could e-mail it.
Photography used to be a cumbersome process involving film coated with silver dug up from mines halfway across the world.
I used to take some pictures with my camera, then bring the film to the drugstore to be sent off to a big plant somewhere for processing.
But once the Internet made it possible to send pictures around the world, attached to or in e-mails, I didn't want to use silver film anymore.
I wanted to take pictures in the digital format, which could be uploaded, not developed.
(And by the way, I didn't want to be confined to using a camera to take them.
I wanted to be able to use my cell phone to do it.)
I used to have to go to Barnes & Noble to buy and browse for books, but once the Internet came alive, I wanted to browse for books digitally on Amazon.com as well.
I used to go to the library to do research, but now I wanted to do it digitally through Google or Yahoo!, not just by roaming the stacks.
I used to buy a C D to listen to Simon & GarfunkelCDs had already replaced albums as a form of digitized musicbut once the Internet came alive, I wanted those music bits to be even more malleable and mobile.
I wanted to be able to download them into an iPod.
In re cent years the digitization technology evolved so I could do just that.
Well, as investors watched this mad rush to digitize everything, they said to themselves, "Holy cow.
If everyone wants all this stuff digitized and turned into bits and transmitted over the Internet, the demand for Web service companies and the demand for fiber-optic cables to handle all this digitized stuff around the world is going to be limitless!
You can not lose if you invest in this!"
And thus was the bubble born.
Overinvestment is not necessarily a bad thingprovided that it is eventually corrected.
I'll always remember a news conference that Microsoft chairman Bill Gates held at the 1999 World Economic Forum in Davos, at the height of the tech bubble.
Over and over again, Gates was bombarded by reporters with versions of the question, "Mr. Gates, THE WORLD IS FLAT these Internet stocks, they're a bubble, right?
Surely they're a bubble.
They must be a bubble?"
Finally an exasperated Gates said to the re porters something to the effect of, "Look, you bozos, of course they're a bubble, but you're all missing the point.
This bubble is attracting so much new capital to this Internet industry, it is going to drive innovation faster and faster."
Gates compared the Internet to the gold rush, the idea being that more money was made selling Levi's, picks, shovels, and hotel rooms to the gold diggers than from digging up gold from the earth.
Gates was right: Booms and bubbles may be economically dangerous; they may end up with many people losing money and a lot of companies going bankrupt.
But they also often do drive innovation faster and faster, and the sheer overcapacity that they spurwhether it is in railroad lines or automobiles can create its own unintended positive consequences.
That is what happened with the Internet stock boom.
It sparked a huge overinvestment in fiber-optic cable companies, which then laid massive amounts of fiber-optic cable on land and under the oceans, which dramatically drove down the cost of making a phone call or trans mitting data anywhere in the world.
The first commercial installation of a fiber-optic system was in 1977, after which fiber slowly began to replace copper telephone wires, be cause it could carry data and digitized voices much farther and faster in larger quantities.
According to Howstuffworks.com, fiber optics are made up of strands of optically pure glass each "as thin as a human hair," which are arranged in bundles, called "optical cables," to carry digitized pack ets of information over long distances.
Because these optical fibers are so much thinner than copper wires, more fibers can be bundled into a given diameter of cable than can copper wires, which means that much more data or many more voices can be sent over the same cable at a lower cost.
The most important benefit of fiber, though, derives from the dramatically higher bandwidth of the signals it can transport over long distances.
Copper wires can carry very high frequencies too, but only for a few feet before the signal starts to degrade in strength due to certain parasitic effects.
Optical fibers, by contrast, can carry very high-frequency optical pulses on the same individual fiber without substantial signal degradation for many, many miles.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD The way fiber-optic cables work, explains one of the manufacturers, ARC Electronics, on its Web site, is by converting data or voices into light pulses and then transmitting them down fiber lines, instead of using electronic pulses to transmit information down copper lines.
At one end of the fiber-optic system is a transmitter.
The transmitter accepts coded electronic pulse informationwords or data coming from copper wire out of your home telephone or office computer.
The transmitter then processes and translates those digitized, electronically coded words or data into equivalently coded light pulses.
A light-emitting diode (LED) or an injection-laser diode (ILD) can be used to generate the light pulses, which are then funneled down the fiber-optic cable.
The cable functions as a kind of light guide, guiding the light pulses introduced at one end of the cable through to the other end, where a light-sensitive receiver con verts the pulses back into the electronic digital Is and Os of the original signal, so they can then show up on your computer screen as e-mail or in your cell phone as a voice.
Fiber-optic cable is also ideal for secure com munications, because it is very difficult to tap.
It was actually the coincidence of the dot-com boom and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 that launched the fiber-optic bubble.
The act allowed local and long-distance companies to get into each other's businesses, and enabled all sorts of new local exchange carriers to compete head-to-head with the Baby Bells and AT&T in providing both phone services and infrastructure.
As these new phone companies came online, offering their own local, long-distance, international, data, and Internet services, each sought to have its own infrastructure.
And why not?
The Internet boom led everyone to assume that the demand for band width to carry all that Internet traffic would double every three months indefinitely.
For about two years that was true.
But then the law of large numbers started to kick in, and the pace of doubling slowed.
Unfor tunately, the telecom companies weren't paying close attention to the de veloping mismatch between demand and reality.
The market was in the grip of an Internet fever, and companies just kept building more and more capacity.
And the stock market boom meant money was free!
It was a party!
So every one of these incredibly optimistic scenarios from every one of these new telecom companies got funded.
In a period of about five THE WORLD IS FLAT or six years, these telecom companies invested about $1 trillion in wiring the world.
And virtually no one questioned the demand projections.
Few companies got crazier than Global Crossing, one of the compa nies hired by all these new tlcoms to lay fiber-optic cable for them around the world.
Global Crossing was founded in 1997 by Gary Winnick and went public the next year.
Robert Annunziata, who lasted only a year as C E O , had a contract that the Corporate Library's Nell Minow once picked as the worst (from the point of view of shareholders) in the United States.
Among other things, it included Annunziata's mother's first-class airfare to visit him once a month.
It also included a signing bonus of two million shares of stock at $10 a share below market.
Henry Schacht, a veteran industrialist now with Warburg Pincus, was brought in by Lucent, the successor of Western Electric, to help manage it through this crazy period.
He recalled the atmosphere: "The telecom deregulation of 1996 was hugely important.
It allowed competitive local ex change carriers to build their own capacities and sell in competition with each other and with the Baby Bells.
These new tlcoms went to companies like Global Crossing and had them install fiber networks for them so they could compete at the transport level with AT&T and MCI, particularly on overseas traffic .
Everyone thought this was a new world, and it would never stop.
[You had] competitive firms using free capital, and everyone thought the pie would expand infinitely.
So [each com pany said,] 'I will put my fiber down before you do, and I will get a big ger share than you.'
It was supposed to be just a vertical growth line, straight up, and we each thought we would get our share, so everybody built to the max projections and assumed that they would get their share."
It turned out that while business-to-business and e-commerce devel oped as projected, and a lot of Web sites that no one anticipated ex plodedlike eBay, Amazon, and Googlethey still devoured only a fraction of the capacity that was being made available.
So when the dot com bust came along, there was just way too much fiber-optic cable out there.
Long-distance phone rates went from $2 a minute to 100.
And the transmission of data was virtually free.
"The telecom industry has in vested itself right out of business," Mike McCue, chief operations offi- THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD cer of Tellme Networks, a voice-activated Internet service, told C N E T News.com in June 2001.
"They've laid so much fiber in the ground that they've basically commoditized themselves.
They are going to get into massive price wars with everyone and it's going to be a disaster."
It was a disaster for many of the companies and their investors (Glo bal Crossing filed for bankruptcy in January 2002, with $12.4 billion in debt), but it turned out to be a great boon for consumers.
Just as the na tional highway system that was built in the 1950s flattened the United States, broke down regional differences, and made it so much easier for companies to relocate in lower-wage regions, like the South, because it had become so much easier to move people and goods long distances, so the laying of global fiber highways flattened the developed world.
It helped to break down global regionalism, created a more seamless global commercial network, and made it simple and almost free to move digi tized laborservice jobs and knowledge workto lower-cost countries.
(It should be noted, though, that those fiber highways in America tended to stop at the last milebefore connecting to households.
While a huge amount of long-distance fiber cable was laid to connect India and America, virtually none of these new U.S. telecom companies laid any substantial new local loop infrastructure, due to a failure of the 1996 tele com deregulation act to permit real competition in the local loop be tween the cable companies and the telephone companies.
Where the local broadband did get installed was in office buildings, which were al ready pretty well served by the old companies.
So this pushed prices down for businessesand for Indians who wanted to get online from Bangalore to do business with those businessesbut it didn't create the sort of com petition that could bring cheap broadband capability to the American masses in their homes.
That has started happening only more recently.)
The broad overinvestment in fiber cable is a gift that keeps on giving, thanks to the unique nature of fiber optics.
Unlike other forms of Internet overinvestment, it was permanent: Once the fiber cables were laid, no one was going to dig them up and thereby eliminate the overca pacity.
So when the telecom companies went bankrupt, the banks took them over and then sold their fiber cables for ten cents on the dollar to new companies, which continued to operate them, which they could do THE WORLD IS FLAT profitably, having bought them in a fire sale.
But the way fiber cable works is that each cable has multiple strands of fiber in it with a potential capacity to transmit many terabits of data per second on each strand.
When these fiber cables were originally laid, the optical switchesthe transmitters and receiversat each end of them could not take full ad vantage of the fiber's total capacity.
But every year since then, the optical switches at each end of that fiber cable have gotten better and better, meaning that more and more voices and data can be transmitted down each fiber.
So as the switches keep improving, the capacity of all the al ready installed fiber cables just keeps growing, making it cheaper and easier to transmit voices and data every year to any part of the world.
It is as though we laid down a national highway system where people were first allowed to drive 50 mph, then 60 mph, then 70 mph, then 80 mph, then eventually 150 mph on the same highways without any fear of acci dents.
Only this highway wasn't just national.
It was international.
"Every layer of innovation gets built on the next," said Andreessen, who went on from Netscape to start another high-tech firm, Opsware Inc. "And today the most profound thing to me is the fact that a fourteenyear-old in Romania or Bangalore or the Soviet Union or Vietnam has all the information, all the tools, all the software easily available to apply knowledge however they want.
That is why I am sure the next Napster is going to come out of left field.
As bioscience becomes more computa tional and less about wet labs, and as all the genomic data becomes eas ily available on the Internet, at some point you will be able to design vaccines on your laptop."
I think Andreessen touches on what is unique about the flat world and the era of Globalization 3.0.
It is going to be driven by groups and indi viduals, but of a much more diverse background than those twelve scien tists who made up Andreessen's world when he created Mosaic.
Now we are going to see the real human mosaic emergefrom all over the world, from left field and right field, from West and East and North and South to drive the next generation of innovation.
Indeed, a few days after Andreessen and I talked, the following headline appeared on the front page of The New York Times (July 15, 2004): "U.S.
Permits 3 Cancer Drugs from Cuba."
The story went on to say, "The federal government is THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD permitting a California biotechnology company to license three experi mental cancer drugs from Cubamaking an exception to the policy of tightly restricting trade with that country."
Executives of the company, CancerVex, said that "it was the first time an American biotechnology company had obtained permission to license a drug from Cuba, a coun try that some industry executives and scientists say is surprisingly strong in biotechnology for a developing nation .
More than $1 billion was spent over the years to build and operate research institutes on the west side of Havana staffed by Cuban scientists, many of them educated in Europe."
Just to summarize again: The Apple-PC-Windows flattening phase was about me interacting with my computer and me interacting with my own limited network inside my own company.
Then came along this Internet-e-mail-browser phase, and it flattened the earth a little bit more.
It was about me and my computer interacting with anyone any where on any machine, which is what e-mail is all about, and me and my computer interacting with anybody's Web site on the Internet, which is what browsing is all about.
In short, the Apple-PC-Windows phase begat the Netscape browsing-e-mail phase, and the two together enabled more people to communicate and interact with more other people any where on the planet than ever before.
But the fun was just beginning.
This phase was just the foundation for the next step in flattening the flat world.
I I, ATT I\ \ I, R // ^ WORK I FLOW SOFTWARE met Scott Hyten, the C E O of Wild Brain, a cutting-edge animation studio in San Francisco that produces films and cartoons for Disney and other major studios, at a meeting in Silicon Valley in the winter of 2004.1 had been invited by John Doerr, the venture capitalist, to test out the ideas in this book with a few of the companies that he was backing.
Hyten and I really hit it off, maybe because after hearing my arguments he wrote me an e-mail that said, "I am sure in Magellan's time there were THE WORLD IS FLAT plenty of theologians, geographers, and pundits who wanted to make the world flat again.
I know the world isflat,and thank you for your support."
A man after my own heart.
When I asked him to elaborate, Hyten sketched out for me how ani mated films are produced today through a global supply chain.
I under stood immediately why he too had concluded that the world is flat.
"At Wild Brain," he said, "we make something out of nothing.
We learn how to take advantage of the flat world.
We are not fighting it.
We are taking advantage of it."
Hyten invited me to come and watch them produce a cartoon seg ment to really appreciate how flat the world is, which I did.
The series they were working on when I showed up was for the Disney Channel and called Higglytown Heroes.
It was inspired by all the ordinary people who rose to the challenge of 9/11.
Higglytown "is the typical 1950s small town," said Hyten.
"It is Pleasantville.
And we are exporting the produc tion of this American small town around the world literally and figura tively.
The foundation of the story is that every person, all the ordinary people living their lives, are the heroes in this small townfrom the schoolteacher to the pizza delivery man."
This all-American show is being produced by an all-world supply chain.
"The recording session," explained Hyten, "is located near the artist, usually in New York or L.A., the design and direction is done in San Francisco, the writers network in from their homes (Florida, London, New York, Chicago, L A , and San Francisco), and the animation of the char acters is done in Bangalore with edits from San Francisco.
For this show we have eight teams in Bangalore working in parallel with eight different writ ers.
This efficiency has allowed us to contract with fifty 'stars' for the twenty-six episodes.
These interactive recording/writing/animation ses sions allow us to record an artist for an entire show in less than half a day, including unlimited takes and rewrites.
We record two actors per week.
For example, last week we recorded Anne Heche and Smokey Robinson.
Technically, we do this over the Internet.
We have a VPN [virtual private network] configured on computers in our offices and on what we call writ ers' 'footballs,' or special laptop computers that can connect over any catfive Ethernet connection or wireless broadband connection in the 'field.'
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD This VPN allows us to share the feed from the microphone, images from the session, the real-time script, and all the animation designs amongst all the locations with a simple log-in.
Therefore, one way for you to observe is for us to ship you a football.
You connect at home, the office, most hotel rooms, or go down to your local Starbucks [which has wireless broadband Internet access], log on, put on a pair of Bose noise-reduction headphones, and listen, watch, read, and comment.
'Sharon, can you sell that line a lit tle more?'
Then, over the eleven-week production schedule for the show, you can log in twenty-four hours a day and check the progress of the pro duction as it follows the sun around the world.
Technically, you need the 'football' only for the session.
You can use your regular laptop to follow the 'dailies' and edits' over the production cycle."
Hyten has since left Wild Brain, but I am glad I visited him that day, because the company is a graphic example of the next layer of innovation, and the next flattener, that broadly followed on the Berlin Wall-Windows and Netscape phases.
The fall of the Berlin Wall was a loud historic event that nobody missed.
Netscape's going public was also much ballyhooed.
But the rise and integration of work flow software was a quiet rev olution that most people had no clue was happening.
It crystallized in the mid- to late 1990s and, when it did, it had as profound an impact on the world as the first two flatteners.
It enabled more people in more places to design, display, manage, and collaborate on business data pre viously handled manually.
As a result, work started to flow within and be tween companies and continents faster than ever.
To get to this point took a lot of new software innovation piled on the shoulders of earlier innovations.
Here's how the work flow revolution de veloped: When the walls went down, and then the PC and Netscape browser enabled people to connect with other people as never before, it did not take long before all these people who were connecting wanted to do more than just browse and send e-mail, instant messages, pictures, and music over this Internet platform.
They wanted to shape things, design things, create things, sell things, buy things, keep track of inventories, do somebody else's taxes, and read somebody else's X-rays from half a world away.
And they wanted to be able to do any of these things from anywhere to anywhere and from any computer to any computerseamlessly.
THE WORLD IS FLAT The first big breakthrough in work flow was actually the combination of the PC and e-mail.
Remember, before the diffusion of computers and the Internet, work flow consisted of your sales department taking an or der on paper over the phone, walking it over to your shipping depart ment, which shipped the product, and then someone from shipping walking over to billing with a piece of paper and instructing the billing department to churn out an invoice to the customer.
But as a result of the Wall-PC-Netscape innovations, work flow took a huge leap forward.
Your sales department could take an order over the phone or by mail, en ter it into a computer system, e-mail the order to the shipping depart ment within your own company, and then have the shipping department send out the product to the customer and automatically spit out a com puterized bill at the same time.
In other words, the Windows-enabled PC gave everyone in the of fice the ability to create and manipulate digital contentwords, data, picturesat their fingertips on their desktops, which was a great leap for ward from paper and typewriters.
And, if your whole office was using the same hardware, software, and e-mail system, you could be even more productive, by seamlessly shooting your digitized content around your company, from department to department.
But more often than not, back in the 1980s and early 1990s, companies did not run all the same software and hardware.
Companies installed systems piecemeal or found that one computer-software system was good for the accounting depart ment and another system was best for inventory management and a third was best for e-mail.
Therefore, a company's sales department might be running Microsoft, while the inventory department was running Novell or IBM.
As a result, they could not communicate or collaborate digitally with each othercouldn't work together on each other's digital content, or certainly not without difficulty.
So while each individual department was more productive inside its own walls, because it had computers, soft ware, and e-mail, when there was an issue between departments that needed to be resolved, someone from sales still had to walk around the wall, over to inventory, and speak to someone there.
Work still did not flow digitally, and collaboration did not happen digitally, as easily as it might have.
We often forget that the software industry started out like a THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD bad fire department.
Imagine a city where every neighborhood had a dif ferent interface for connecting the fire hose to the hydrant.
Everything was fine as long as your neighborhood's fire department could handle your fire.
But when a fire became too big, and the fire engines from the next neighborhood had to be called in, they were useless because they could not connect their hoses to your hydrants.
So while it was a big breakthrough that we standardized the ways that words, music, pictures, and data would be digitized on PCs and trans ported on the Internet, for work really to be able to flow seamlessly around my company, and then to other companies in my digital ecosys tem, we needed two more things.
We needed more magic pipes, more transmission protocols and languages, that would ensure that everyone's e-mail and software applications could connect seamlessly with everyone else's e-mail and software applications inside and outside my companyno matter what computer or software they were running.
And we needed programmers to come along and write new applicationsnew software that would enable us really to get the maximum from our computers as we worked with this digitized data, words, music, and pictures and shaped them into products.
The software industry did the first by creating and popularizing a pro tocol known as SMTPsimple mail transfer protocolwhich enabled the exchange of e-mail messages between heterogeneous computer sys tems.
So you could send e-mail to other people without having to worry about what hardware or e-mail service they had.
Suddenly the world had an electronic postman who delivered the mail anywhere quickly and cheaply, despite rain, sleet, or snow.
But for your company to get really flat, e-mail was not enough.
All your internal departmentssales, marketing, manufacturing, billing, and in ventoryhad to become interoperable, no matter what machines or soft ware each of them was running and no matter what documents or data anyone wanted to exchange or collaborate on.
That is, your sales depart ment had to be able to send not just e-mail messages but also documents to your billing department and spreadsheets to your supplier's inventory department.
And your supplier's inventory department had to be seam lessly connected to its supplier's supplier, which was a factory in China.
THE WORLD IS FLAT To work through the Tower of Babel of software and hardware speak ing different languages that evolved in the 1980s and early 1990s, how ever, required another big breakthrough.
It required electronic railroad tracks that could run between everyone's hardware, and railroad cars that could transport documents or data, in a way that could be read by any one's software.
This railroad turned out to be the protocols I mentioned abovethe language of the Internet and World Wide Web.
HTML was the language that enabled anyone to design and publish documents and data so that they could be transmitted to, and read on, any computer any where.
HTTP was the computer language that described how you put this content on the Internet railroad how you made it into a railroad car that could go anywhere.
And TCP/IP (transmission control protocol/ Internet protocol) was the railroad trackthe transport system that took the data from your Web pages around the Internet from computer to computer and Web site to Web site.
(As stepforth.com, a technology Web site, described it, TCP/IP "is based on the simple concept of breaking large chunks of data into byte-size packets, directing those packets from computer to computer through a scalable network, and reconstituting the individual packets to replicate the original document.")
"These protocols allowed people to exchange things other than stan dardized Word documents or e-mail," explained Craig Mundie, the Microsoft chief technical officer.
"They enabled anyone to describe any kind of document they wantedfrom an Amazon.com page to a credit card payment formatand transport it from machine to machine, and put it in front of your face, without any prior understanding or prepara tion between the person sending it and you, the person receiving it."
That enabled work to really start flowing by the mid-1990s.
It sure did.
Wild Brain wanted seamlessly interoperable work flow software to make animated films with a production team spread out around the world.
Boeing wanted it so that its airplane factories in America could constantly resupply different airline customers with parts, through its computer ordering systems, no matter what country those orders came from, and so its designers could work on planes using airplane engineers from Russia to India to Japan.
Doctors wanted it so that an X-ray taken in Bangor could be read in a hospital in Bangalore, without THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD the doctor in Maine ever having to wonder what computers that Indian hospital had.
And Mom and Dad wanted it so that their e-banking soft ware, e-brokerage software, office e-mail, and spreadsheet software all would work off their home laptop and be able to interface with their of fice desktop or BlackBerry handheld device.
And once everyone's appli cations started to connect to everyone else's applications, work could not only flow like never before, but it could be chopped up, disaggregated, and sent to the four corners of the world as never before.
"But then," added Microsoft's Mundie, "we said to ourselves, 'Geez, if we really want to automate everything, then we need to make it much easier not just for people to talk to people, but for machines to talk to machinesfor machines to interact with other machines about any sub ject without any humans involved at all or any a priori relationship be tween the different companies whose machines were communicating.'
" That was the next work flow breakthrough.
Technically, what made it possible was the development of a new data description language, called XML (extensible markup language) and its related transport protocol called SOAP (simple object access pro tocol).
Together, they allow any two computer programs to exchange formatted data or documents that contain any form of information  whether billing records, financial transactions, medical records, music, pictures, bank records, Web pages, advertisements, book excerpts, Word documents, or stock sales.
Microsoft, IBM, and a host of other compa nies contributed to the development of XML and SOAP, and both were subsequently ratified and popularized as Internet standards.
This took work flow to a whole new level.
Suddenly I could write my own invoice program, using XML and SOAP, and know that my computers could transmit that invoice to your computers, without any human beings in volved or any a priori agreement between our two companies.
The net result, added Mundie, was that "the industry created a global platform for a global workforce of people and computers."
In sum, we started in the 1980s with people being able to use PCs to author their own content in digital form, which they printed out on pa per and then exchanged with others by hand or surface mail and even tually e-mail.
Then we went to people being able to churn out digital THE WORLD IS FLAT content on their PCs, which they transmitted around the Internet, thanks to standardized protocols, collaborating with anyone anywhere.
And finally, today, we have reached a point in work flow that machines are talking to other machines over the Internet using standardized pro tocols, with no humans involved at all.
STANDARDS ON TOP OF STANDARDS Where is all this going?
The great thing about HTML, HTTP, TCP/IP, XML, and SOAP is that once they were adopted as standardsand everything and everyone became increasingly interoperable and interconnectedsoftware companies stopped competing over who got to control the fire hydrant nozzles and focused on who could make bet ter hoses and fire trucks to pump more water.
Once a standard takes hold, people start to focus on the quality of what they are doing as op posed to how they are doing it.
In other words, once everyone could con nect with everyone else, they got busy on the real value add, which was coming up with the most useful and nifty software applications to en hance collaboration, innovation, and creativity.
Meanwhile, more and more standards were being adopted.
Work really flows when you not only get standards for the underlying pipes so anyone can send any document, picture, or data to any other machine with any other softwarebut when you also start to standardize what the pipes are carryingthe documents or the business processes.
So now we are not just coding documents and software applications in a standard ized waylike a Word document or a Web pagethat can be read by anyone else on his or her own computer or anyone else's machine, we are also standardizing the business process that those documents repre sent.
"For example," said IBM's Joel Cawley, "when you apply for a mort gage, go to your closing, or buy a house, there are literally dozens of processes and data flows among many different companies.
One bank may handle securing your approval, checking your credit, establishing your interest rates, and handling the closingafter which the loan al most immediately is sold to a different bank."
Once a standard is estab- THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD lished around all these real estate processes, the broker can focus a lot more on you and your needs, not on chasing documents.
We are already seeing standards emerging around how payrolls are done, e-commerce payment, and risk profiling, around how music and photos are digitally transmitted and editedthe JPEG standard, for instanceand, most important, around how supply chains are connected.
For instance, it is great that anyone can get on eBay and become a buyer or seller from any machine using any browser, but what really made the eBay marketplace explode was when it adopted PayPal, a stan dard that enabled the buyer to pay the seller very easily.
PayPal is a money transfer system founded in 1998 to facilitate C2C (customer-tocustomer) transactions, like a buyer and seller brought together by eBay.
According to ecommerce-guide.com, using PayPal, anyone with an e-mail address can send money to anyone else with an e-mail address, whether the recipient has a PayPal account or not.
PayPal doesn't even care whether a commercial transaction is taking place.
If someone in the of fice is organizing a party for someone else and everyone needs to chip in, they can all do it using PayPal.
In fact, the organizer can send everyone PayPal reminders by e-mail with clear instructions as to how to pay up.
PayPal can accept money from the purchaser in one of three ways, notes ecommerce-guide.com: charging the purchaser's credit card for any transactions (payments), debiting a checking account for any payments, or deducting payments from a PayPal account established with a per sonal check.
Payment recipients can use the money in their account for online purchases or payments, can receive the payment from PayPal by check, or can have PayPal directly deposit the money into a checking ac count.
Setting up a PayPal account is simple.
As a payer, all you have to do is to provide your name, your e-mail address, your credit card infor mation, and your billing address for your credit card.
All of these interoperable banking and e-commerce functions flat tened the Internet marketplace so radically that even eBay was taken by surprise.
Before PayPal, explained eBay C E O Meg Whitman, "If I did business on eBay in 1999, the only way I could pay you as a buyer was with a check or money order, a paper-based system.
There was no elec tronic way to send money, and you were too small a merchant to qualify THE WORLD IS FLAT for a credit card account.
What PayPal did was enable people, individu als, to accept credit cards.
I could pay you as an individual seller on eBay with a credit card.
This really leveled the playing field and made com merce more frictionless."
In fact, it was so good that eBay bought PayPal, but not on the recommendation of its Wall Street investment bankers on the recommendation of its users.
"We woke up one day," said Whitman, "and found out that 20 per cent of the people on eBay were saying, 'I accept PayPal, please pay me that way/ And we said, 'Who are these people and what are they doing?'
At first we tried to fight them and launched our own service, called Billpoint.
Finally, in July 2002, we were at [an] eBay Live [convention] and the drumbeat through the hall was deafening.
Our community was telling us, 'Would you guys stop fighting?
We want a standardand by the way, we have picked the standard and it's called PayPal, and we know you guys at eBay would like it to be your [standard], but it's theirs.'
And that is when we knew we had to buy the company, because it was the standard and it was not o u r s .
It is the best acquisition we ever made."
In the coming phase of work flow, here is how you will make a den tist appointment: First, there will be a common standard for making den tal appointments with any dentist.
You will instruct your computer by voice to make an appointment.
Your computer will automatically trans late your voice into a digital instruction.
It will automatically check your calendar against the available dates on your dentist's calendar and offer you three choices.
You will click on the preferred date and hour.
The week before your appointment, your dentist's calendar will automatically send you an e-mail reminding you of the appointment.
The night before, you will get a computer-generated voice message by phone, also re minding you of your appointment.
For work flow to keep advancing along these lines, though, and de liver the productivity enhancements we want, "we need more and more common standards," said IBM's strategic planner Cawley.
"These are standards about how we do business work together."
The more we con nect everyone through common communication standards, like XML, and then, on top of those protocols, connect more and more people through standardized business processes, said Cawley, the easier it is to THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD chop up work and send pieces of it to be done anywhere in the world, and the more it increases productivity and enables my whole digital ecosystem to collaborate better, cheaper, and faster, and the more energy my employees have to concentrate on the high-touch, high-value-add, customized innovation or service that differentiates one company from another.
Standards don't stop innovation, added Cawley, they just clear away a lot of extraneous stuff so you can focus on what really matters.
THE LATEST UBERSTANDARD As I write, work flow is about to go to yet another level.
Now that we have created more and more standard ways for people and machines to de scribe and share documents and work together, and at least some stan dards for how to conduct certain kinds of commercelike mortgages or credit card paymentsanother revolution is under way, made possible by an emerging new way of coding called AJAX (short for asynchronous JavaScript and XML).
AJAX provides easy access to richer and more so phisticated Web-based business tools that you can use to run a whole companyonlineat very low cost.
When I say run a company, I mean keeping track of inventory, staying in touch with customers, recruiting, project management, product development, scheduling, budgeting, and human resources.
In the Business Web, as it is being called, you access these tools on the Web, use them on the Web, and store all your business data on the Web, rather than on your own computers.
Before long these Web-delivered services will likely replace some, or all, of the business software programs that you buy, load, update, upgrade, and integrate with other systems.
This constitutes a huge leap forward in work flow.
Ray Ozzie, another of Microsoft's chief technical officers, calls it "the Internet services disrup tion."
Here is how it works: Internet-based services companies are emerg ing today all across the Web.
For a fee, these companies-Salesforce.com, for examplegive you access to a library of Web-based business applica tions, which you can just tap into online to run your business.
These ap plications operate like traditional software programs and can handle a THE WORLD IS FLAT wide range of business tasks.
The big difference is that all these manage ment tools, data, or even photos are not stored on your computer as soft ware.
They are stored remotely on the Salesforce.com platform.
Because these tools are delivered over the Internet and written in standard Web formats, they are accessible to anyone who has an Internet connection and are easily interoperable with any business.
What enables work flow at this level is AJAX, a Web development technique that allows complex Internet business applications to be embedded onto a Web page, then called up with a simple browser and accessed as easily as viewing a page on Amazon.com.
AJAX, in effect, allows you to do over the Internet all the word, data, and business processing you would normally do on a PC with conventional software.
You as a business pay Salesforce.com $65 per individual user per month to subscribe to its Web-based platform ($17 per user for companies of one to five people).
Software becomes something you rent, instead of something you own.
Somebody else takes care of the upgrading and maintenance.
"We can upgrade our service on a daily basis and, because the service is built using Web standards and delivered over the Web, upgrades are instantaneously available and can be immediately accessed by every cus tomer around the world," said Ken Juster, Salesforce.com s executive vice president for law, policy, and corporate strategy.
"We are not just try ing to move information and data; we are trying to share business solu tions and best practices for how things get donewithin companies and across companies."
As your company uses the online business tools offered by Salesforce.com to make your work flow, your business process team may come up with a customized solution that works really well for you and your clients.
You can then turn around and offer that solution back to the Salesforce.com platform as a tool others might want to usefor free, or you can get a fee for your business process innovation.
That way Salesforce.com basically uses its customers and partners to grow its plat form and embed itself into more and more businesses.
Its customers, in effect, become part of its sales and research and development teams.
"We could never build applications for customers as quickly and eas ily as they can for themselves," Marc Benioff, the Salesforce.com CEO, THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD told internetnews.com on April 12, 2005.
Because a huge library of business process applications is available at Salesforce.com, they can be drawn upon by a one-person company or by IBM.
Juster said one of his favorite customers using Salesforce.corn's platform is a thirty-something small businessman in Shanghai, Justin Lu, and his company, Protime Consulting.
Lu helps global companies which have outlets in China, like Sony, Hyatt, or Este Lauder, with their e-marketing and Web site solutions.
He now has thirty people working for him and does over $1 million in business annually.
"I can run virtually my entire business on the Web using Salesforce.com," said Lu.
"We've been able to grow very quickly by focusing on what's important to generating more revenue and keeping our systems costs low with Web-delivered services."
For instance, he uses Salesforce.com's online e-mail marketing system to send out mass e-mails, he uses its sales force automation system to han dle all presale data, and he uses its customer relationship management system to build a corporate memory around all his customer interactions.
He is getting the intellectual property from these three applications, said Juster, and they are empowering him to start a company with very little money.
I learned of a start-up that is using the Business Web to sell organic vi tamins.
This guy pays Yahoo!
a fee every month so that any time anyone searches for the words "organic vitamins" on Yahoo!, one of his ads pops up.
He then uses the Salesforce.com platform to manage his back room, and he found a manufacturer to make his own private-label organic vita mins.
Boom!
With virtually no money, working out of his homebut leveraging the search power of Yahoo!
and the backroom power of Salesforcehe is now out there competing with major drugstore chains.
Just as the Business Web is giving small businessmen like Justin Lu easy access to some business tools that only large companies could afford a few years ago, it is also setting the stage for a revolutionary change in the balance of power among the providers of business applications.
The next logical step in the evolution of the Business Web will be eBay-like marketplaces for business services.
Individual developers and entrepre neurs, whether they are located in Shanghai, Bangalore, or Silicon Valley, will be able to write applications, plug their innovations into Web THE WORLD IS FLAT platforms like Salesforce.com, and leverage the marketing and distribu tion strength of these Web platforms to sell globally, without the heavy investment that is required today to commercialize software.
"This is just the beginning of the Business Web," argued Benioff, Salesforce.corn's C E O , in a memo to his staff in November 2005.
"The software industry is going through a transformation that is unlike any thing it has seen in two decades, and [comparable to] the emergence of the PC itself.
New Internet-based companies are showing how ser vices will replace software for both consumers and corporations."
As Benioff likes to put it: "Microsoft wants you to buy more software.
We want to see the end of software."
Microsoft has taken notice.
The New York Times reported on No vember 9, 2005, that Ray Ozzie had written an in-house memo warning senior executives that Microsoft had to fundamentally alter its business "or face being at a significant competitive disadvantage to a growing ar ray of companies offering Internet services."
A few days later, Microsoft announced that it would offer two new servicesWindows Live and Office Live, which essentially are Business Web versions of two of its more popular products.
A few weeks later, Google announced that it was offering a free, downloadable software bundle, with none of the pro grams coming from Microsoft.
This is going to get interesting!
There is no question that the Business Web will challenge Microsoft.
But I wouldn't short Microsoft or throw out all my software just yet.
It is true we are going from a world where companies were independent sys tems, to a world where they became interconnected and interdependent systems, to a world where now companies large and small can assemble an interoperable system of systems on their own just by going to the Business Web and renting or assembling whatever discrete programs they would like.
The virtual company is here and it is going to be verydisruptive.
Because it is going to give small and medium-size businesses access to some of the powerful work flow tools that a few years ago only big companies could afford.
But remember: When you have these standardized work flow tools, so does everyone else.
You still have to have a unique product or service to offer.
And for that you often need to develop a unique way to apply THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD information technologies to your core value proposition, whatever it is.
It is great to be able to do your customer relationship management on the Web for a small fee, it is great to have really efficient work flow.
But first you need your own customersyour own distinctive competency for your company.
And that means you need proprietary insights, in novations and, yes, proprietary software tools or systems, to build your unique product or service.
Your distinctive competencythe thing that will build a moat around your companywill always be created, enhanced, or embodied in some proprietary algorithm or manufactur ing process or software application.
You can't get everything off the shelf or off the Web if you could, your competition could, too.
If you are running a bond fund, all the standards and work flow that now ex ist for seamlessly trading bonds are a godsend for you.
But it will be your own unique, knock-their-socks-off algorithm for when to buy and sell those bonds that will ultimately determine your success or failure.
That is why there will still be a place for the big, smart traditional soft ware companies, like Microsoft and SAP, that can create a tailored so lution for each client.
Also, as Microsoft has demonstrated, it too will make some of its programs available on the Business Web.
Nevertheless, this revolution in work flow that we have witnessed  from transmission protocols to standards to business processes that you can now just rent off the Web is surely going to lead to an explosion of experimentation and innovation.
And out of this whirlwind, many new products and services will surely emerge, as well as a demand for more tailored, proprietary software and IT systems to drive them for ward.
By the time the smoke next clears, how we think about work, how we make it flow, and even how we start a company will probably be radically transformed.
"Work flow platforms are enabling us to do for the service industry what Henry Ford did for manufacturing," said Jerry Rao, the entrepre neur doing accounting work for Americans out of India.
"We are taking apart each task, [standardizing it,] and sending it around to whoever can do it best, and because we are doing it in a virtual environment, people need not be physically adjacent to each other, and then we are reassem bling all the pieces back together at headquarters [or some other remote THE WORLD IS FLAT site].
This is not a trivial revolution.
This is a major one.
It allows for a boss to be somewhere and his employees to be someplace else."
These work flow software platforms, Rao added, "enable you to create virtual global officesnot limited by either the boundaries of your office or your countryand to access talent sitting in different parts of the world and have them complete tasks that you need completed in real time.
And so 24/7/365 we are all working.
And all this has happened in the twinkling of an eyethe span of the last two or three years."
Genesis: The Flat-World Platform Emerges W 'e need to stop here and take stock, because at this point the platform for the flattening of the world has started to emerge.
First, the falling of the walls, the opening of the Windows, and the rise of the PC all com bined to empower more individuals than ever to become authors of their own content in digital form.
Then the spread of the Internet and the com ing to life of the Web, thanks to the browser and fiber optics, enabled more people than ever to be connected and to share their digital content with more other people for less money than any time before.
Finally, the emer gence of standardized transmission pipes and protocols that connected everyone's machines and software applications, and also encouraged the development of standardized business processes for how certain kinds of commerce or work would be conducted, meant that more people were not just seamlessly connected but also were able to seamlessly work together on one another's digital content more than ever before.
Put it all together and what you end up with is the crude foundation of a whole new global platform for collaboration.
This was the genesis moment for the flattening of the world, and it came together in the mid- to late 1990s.
All the elements of this new platform (such as the Business Web) would take more time to fully emerge and converge.
That would hap pen only in the 2000s.
But this moment in the mid- to late 1990s was when people first started to feel that something was changing in a big way.
There was suddenly available a platform for collaboration that all kinds of people from around the globe could now plug and play, compete and connect THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD onin order to share work, exchange knowledge, start companies, and in vent and sell goods and services.
"It is the creation of this platform, with these unique attributes, that is the truly important sustainable break through that made what you call the flattening of the world possible," said Microsoft's Craig Mundie.
Because, as Joel Cawley, the IBM strategist, added, "We were not just communicating with each other more than ever, we were now able to collaborateto build coalitions, projects, and prod ucts togethermore than ever."
This rudimentary platform helped to spawn six more flatteners, or, more accurately, six new forms of collaboration.
I call them "uploading," "out sourcing," "offshoring," "supply-chaining," "insourcing," and "in-forming."
Each of these new forms of collaboration was either made possible by this emerging flat-world platform or greatly enhanced by it.
And as more and more of us learn how to collaborate in these new and different ways, we are steadily flattening the world even more.
It is always dangerous to declare a turning point in history.
We always tend to feel that when we are alive something really major is happening.
But I am convinced that the genesis of this new flat-world platform and the six new forms of collaboration it has spawned will be remembered in time as one of the most important turning points in the history of mankindone no less significant than the invention of the printing press or electricity.
Someone had to be alive when it happenedand it happens to be you and me.
I l.A 1 T I.N I, R //4 UPLOADING Harnessing the Power of Communities A lan Cohen still remembers the first time he heard the word "Apache" as an adult, and it wasn't while watching a cowboys-andIndians movie.
It was the 1990s, the dot-com market was booming, and he was a senior manager for IBM, helping to oversee its emerging e-commerce business.
"I had a whole team with me and a budget of about $8 million," Cohen recalled.
"We were competing head-to-head with Microsoft, THE WORLD IS FLAT Netscape, Oracle, Sun all the big boys.
And we were playing this very big-stakes game for e-commerce.
IBM had a huge sales force selling all this e-commerce software.
One day I asked the development director who worked for me, 'Say, Jeff, walk me through the development process for these e-commerce systems.
What is the underlying Web server?'
And he says to me, 'It's built on top of Apache.'
The first thing I think of is John Wayne.
'What is Apache?'
I ask.
And he says it is a shareware pro gram for Web server technology.
He said it was produced for free by a bunch of geeks just working online in some kind of open-source chat room.
I was floored.
I said, 'How do you buy it?'
And he says, 'You down load it off a Web site for free.'
And I said, 'Well, who supports it if some thing goes wrong?'
And he says, 'I don't knowit just works!'
And that was my first exposure to Apache .
"Now you have to remember, back then Microsoft, IBM, Oracle, Netscape were all trying to build commercial Web servers.
These were huge companies.
And suddenly my development guy is telling me that he's getting ours off the Internet for free!
It's like you had all these big cor porate executives plotting strategies, and then suddenly the guys in the mail room are in charge.
I kept asking, 'Who runs Apache?
I mean, who are these guys?'
" Yes, the geeks in the mail room are deciding what software they will be usingand what you will be using too, because communities of geeks are now collaborating to design new software and then to upload it to the world.
It's called community developed software.
But, thanks to the flatworld platform, more and more geeks on the Web are also offering up their own news and opinion pieces, cutting out the middlemen of news papers.
It's called blogging.
And a community of geeks in the library is now writing its own encyclopedia entries, uploading them to the world, and cutting out the traditional book-form encyclopedias and even digital ones like Encarta.
It's called Wikipedia.
And the geeks in the dorm are increasingly offering up their own songs, and videos, and poetry, and rap, and commentary, to you and me and the rest of the world, cutting out the music stores and the traditional content providers.
It's called podcasting.
And the geeks on Amazon.com are increasingly writing their own book reviews, becoming among the most important reviewers in the THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD world, reducing the dominance of traditional icons like The New York Review of Books and The New York Times Book Review.
Soon, I suspect, Amazon will publish your whole book for you online.
And the geeks on eBay are already creating their own virtual commercial community and policing themselves as to who is a trustworthy buyer or seller, by handing out stars.
And the terrorist geeks in al-Qaeda are increasingly uploading their own news reports, threats, and speeches, not waiting for the BBC or CBS to come talk to them, and then they're zapping their terror mes sages directly into your computer, via AOL or MSN.
These are all variations of uploading.
The genesis of the flat-world platform not only enabled more people to author more content, and to collaborate on that content.
It also enabled them to upload files and globalize that contentindividually or as part of self-forming communitieswithout going through any of the traditional hierarchical organizations or institutions.
This newfound power of individuals and communities to send up, out, and around their own products and ideas, often for free, rather than just passively downloading them from commercial enterprises or tradi tional hierarchies, is fundamentally reshaping the flow of creativity, innovation, political mobilization, and information gathering and dis semination.
It is making each of these things a bottom-up and globally side-to-side phenomenon, not exclusively a top-down one.
This is now true inside traditional companies and institutions as well as outside them.
Uploading is, without doubt, becoming one of the most revolu tionary forms of collaboration in the flat world.
More than ever, we can all now be producers, not just consumers.
I got the idea of defining "uploading" (in this context) as my fourth flattener from a brilliant essay, "We Are the Web," by Wired magazine's cofounder and "senior maverick," Kevin Kelly (August 2005).
Kelly noted that when the Internet first emerged on a mass scale in the post-Netscape era, "the bandwidth on cable and phone lines was asymmetrical: down load rates far exceeded upload rates.
The dogma of the age held that ordi nary people had no need to upload; they were consumers, not producers.
Fast-forward to today, and the poster child of the new Internet regime is BitTorrent.
[BitTorrent is a Web site that allows users to upload their own THE WORLD IS FLAT online music libraries and download other people s at the same time.]
Our communication infrastructure has taken only the first steps in this great shift from audience to participants, but that is where it will go in the next decade."
It is not impossible to imagine, added Kelly, that one day in the future, "everyone alive will (on average) write a song, author a book, make a video, craft a Weblog, and code a program .
What happens when the data flow is asymmetricalbut in favor of the creators?
What happens when everyone is uploading far more than they download?"
It was long assumed that producing any product of substance or com plexity takes some kind of hierarchical organization or institution.
The assumption was that you needed top-down vertical integration to get such things done and out into the world.
But thanks to our newfound ability to uploadwhich came about as a direct result of the flat-world platformyou can now produce really complex things, as an individual or as part of a community, with so much less hierarchy and so much less money than ever before.
I am going to focus here on three forms of uploading: the communitydeveloped software movement, Wikipedia, and blogging/podcasting.
COMMUNITY-DEVELOPED SOFTWARE The community-developed software movement, also known as the "opensource" community, derives its identity from the notion that companies or ad hoc communities should make available online the source codethe underlying programming instructions that make a piece of software workand then let anyone who has something to contribute improve it and let millions of others just download it for their own use.
Think of these communities as chat rooms with freelance engineers who collabo rate together to produce a piece of software, with everyone contributing improvements to the source code to make it sing and dance better, and using it, as long as they conform to the license rules of that particular open-source community.
While these communities tend to operate along the same lines, they are divided into two factions by one big issue.
One faction, let s call it the "intellectual commons community," basically says THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD that anyone in the community may use the source code as the foundation for a commercial productas long as you always acknowledge the origi nal group that produced it.
So as that software rolls downstream into sub sequent improvements, adaptations, and implementations, you have to give the original community credit each time.
The other group, let's call it the "free software community," argues that if you build and distribute any derivative product on the shoulders of community-developed free software code, you need to contribute your innovation back to the com munity as well.
That is, you need to make your product free.
Not being a computer geek, I had never focused much on the opensource movement, but when I did, I discovered it was an amazing universe of its own, with self-forming communities of online, come-as-you-are vol unteers.
The first community-developed software movement really to make a mark took the intellectual commons approach.
It came out of the aca demic and scientific communities, where for a long time self-organized col laborative communities of scientists have come together through private networks (and, eventually, the Internet) to pool their brainpower or share insights around a particular science or math problem.
The Apache Web server had its roots in this form of open-sourcing.
When I asked a friend of mine, Mike Arguello, an IT systems architect, to explain to me why people share knowledge or work in this way, he said, "IT people tend to be very bright people and they want everybody to know just how bril liant they are."
Marc Andreessen, who invented the Mosaic Web browser, agreed: "Open-source is nothing more than peer-reviewed science.
Sometimes people contribute to these things because they make science, and they discover things, and the reward is reputation.
Sometimes you can build a business out of it; sometimes they just want to increase the store of knowledge in the world.
And the peer review part is criticaland open-source is peer review.
Every bug or security hole or deviation from standards is reviewed."
Some people also clearly get a buzz from trying to challenge giants, like Microsoft or IBM, by proving that they can build something better for free.
To learn more about this intellectual commons form of software development, I went exploring among the geeky guys and girls in the mailroom.
Eventually, I found my way to one of their pioneers, Brian THE WORLD IS FLAT Behlendorf.
If Apachethe open-source Web server communitywere an Indian tribe, Behlendorf would be the tribal elder.
I caught up with him one day in his glass-and-steel office near the San Francisco airport, where he is now founder and chief technology officer of CollabNet, a start up focused on creating software for companies that want to use an opensource approach to innovation.
I started with two simple questions: Where did you come from?
and How did you manage to pull together an opensource community of online geeks that could go toe-to-toe with IBM?
"My parents met at IBM in Southern California, and I grew up in a town just north of Pasadena, La Canada," Behlendorf recalled.
"The public school was very competitive academically, because a lot of the kids' parents worked at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory that was run by Caltech there.
So from a very early age I was around a lot of science in a place where it was okay to be kind of geeky.
We always had computers around the house.
We used to use punch cards from the original IBM mainframes for making shopping lists.
In grade school, I started doing some basic programming, and by high school I was pretty into comput ers .
I graduated in 1991, but in 1989, in the early days of the Internet, a friend gave me a copy of a program he had downloaded onto a floppy disk, called Tractint.'
It was not pirated, but was freeware, produced by a group of programmers, and was a program for drawing fractals.
[Fractals are beautiful images produced at the intersection of art and math.]
When the program started up, the screen would show this scrolling list of e-mail addresses for all the scientists and mathematicians who con tributed to it.
I noticed that the source code was included with the pro gram.
This was my first exposure to the concept of open-source.
Here was this program that you just downloaded for free, and they even gave you the source code with it, and it was done by a community of people.
It started to paint a different picture of programming in my mind.
I started to think that there were some interesting social dynamics to the way certain kinds of software were written or could be writtenas op posed to the kind of image I had of the professional software developer in the back office tending to the mainframe, feeding info in and taking it out for the business.
That seemed to me to be just one step above ac counting and not very exciting."
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD After graduating in 1991, Behlendorf went to Berkeley to study physics, but he quickly became frustrated by the disconnect between the abstractions he was learning in the classroom and the excitement that was starting to emerge on the Internet.
"When you entered college back then, every student was given an e-mail address, and I started using it to talk to students and explore dis cussion boards that were starting to appear around music," said Behlen dorf.
"In 1992,1 started my own Internet mailing list focused on the local electronic music scene in the Bay Area.
People could just post onto the discussion board, and it started to grow, and we started to discuss differ ent music events and DJs.
Then we said, 'Hey, why don't we invite our own DJs and throw our own events?'
It became a collective thing.
Someone would say, 1 have some records,' and someone else would say, 'I have a sound system,' and someone else would say, 'I know the beach and if we showed up at midnight we could have a party.'
By 1993, the Internet was still just mailing lists and e-mail and FTP sites [file transfer protocol repositories where you could store things].
So I started collect ing an archive of electronic music and was interested in how we could put this online and make it available to a larger audience.
That was when I heard about Mosaic [the Web browser developed by Marc Andreessen].
So I got a job at the computer lab in the Berkeley business school, and I spent my spare time researching Mosaic and other Web technologies.
That led me to a discussion board with a lot of the people who were writ ing the first generation of Web browsers and Web servers."
(A Web server is a software program that enables anyone to use his or her home or office computer to host a Web site on the World Wide Web.
Amazon.com, for instance, has long run its Web site on Apache software.
When your Web browser goes to www.amazon.com, the very first piece of software it talks to is Apache.
The browser asks Apache for the Amazon Web page and Apache sends back to the browser the content of the Amazon Web page.
Surfing the Web is really your Web browser interact ing with different Web servers.)
"I found myself sitting in on this forum watching Tim Berners-Lee and Marc Andreessen debating how all these things should work," re called Behlendorf.
"It was pretty exciting, and it seemed radically inclu- THE WORLD IS FLAT sive.
I didn't need a Ph.D. or any special credentials, and I started to see some parallels between my music group and these scientists, who had a common interest in building the first Web software.
I followed that [dis cussion] for a while and then I told a friend of mine about it.
He was one of the first employees at Wired magazine, and he said Wired would be in terested in having me set up a Web site for them.
So I joined there at $10 an hour, setting up their e-mail and their first Web siteHotWired .
It was one of the first ad-supported online magazines."
HotWired decided it wanted to start by having a registration system that required passwordsa controversial concept at that time.
"In those days," noted Andrew Leonard, who wrote a history of Apache for Salon.com in 1997, "most Webmasters depended on a Web server program developed at the University of Illinois's National Center for Supercomputing Applications (also the birthplace of the groundbreaking Mosaic Web browser).
But the NCSA Web server couldn't handle password authenti cation on the scale that HotWired needed.
Luckily, the NCSA server was in the public domain, which meant that the source code was free to all comers.
So Behlendorf exercised the hacker prerogative: He wrote some new code, a 'patch' to the NCSA Web server, that took care of the prob lem."
Leonard commented, "He wasn't the only clever programmer rummaging through the NCSA code that winter.
All across the explod ing Web, other Webmasters were finding it necessary to take matters into their own keyboards.
The original code had been left to gather virtual dust when its primary programmer, University of Illinois student Rob McCool, had been scooped up (along with Marc Andreessen and Lynx author Eric Bina) by a little-known company in Silicon Valley named Netscape.
Meanwhile, the Web refused to stop growingand kept cre ating new problems for Web servers to cope with."
So patches of one kind or another proliferated like Band-Aids on bandwidth, plugging one hole here and breaching another gap there.
Meanwhile, all these patches were slowly, in an ad hoc open-source manner, building a new modern Web server.
But everyone had his or her own version, trading patches here and there, because the NCSA lab couldn't keep up with them all.
"I was just this near-dropout," explained Behlendorf.
"I was having a lot THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD of fun building this Web site for Wired and learning more than I was learn ing at Berkeley.
So a discussion started in our little working group that the NCSA people were not answering our e-mails.
We were sending in patches for the system and they weren't responding.
And we said, 'If NCSA would not respond to our patches, what's going to happen in the future?'
We were happy to continue improving this thing, yet we were worried when we were not getting any feedback and seeing our patches integrated.
So I started to contact the other people I knew trading patches...
Most of them were on the standards working groups [the Internet Engineering Task Force] that were setting the first standards for the interconnectivity be tween machines and applications on the Internet... And we said, 'Why don't we take our future into our own hands and release our own [Web server] version that incorporated all our patches?'
"We looked up the copyright for the NCSA code, and it basically just said give us credit at Illinois for what we invented if you improve itand don't blame us if it breaks," recalled Behlendorf.
"So we started building our own version from all our patches.
None of us had time to be a fulltime Web server developer, but we thought if we could combine our time and do it in a public way, we could create something better than we could buy off the shelfand nothing was available then, anyway.
This was all before Netscape had shipped its first commercial Web server.
That was the beginning of the Apache project."
By February 1999, they had completely rewritten the original NCSA program and formalized their cooperation under the name "Apache."
"I picked the name because I wanted it to have a positive connotation of being assertive," said Behlendorf.
"The Apache tribe was the last tribe to surrender to the oncoming U.S. government, and at the time we wor ried that the big companies would come in and 'civilize' the landscape that the early Internet engineers built.
So 'Apache' made sense to me as a good code name, and others said it also would make a good pun"as in the APAtCHy server, because they were patching all these fixes together.
So in many ways, Behlendorf and his open-source colleaguesmost of whom he had never met but knew only by e-mail through their opensource chat roomhad created a virtual, online, bottom-up software fac tory, which no one owned and no one supervised.
"We had a software THE WORLD IS FLAT project, but the coordination and direction were an emergent behavior based on whoever showed up and wanted to write code," he said.
But how does it actually work?
I asked Behlendorf.
You can't just have a bunch of people, unmonitored, throwing code together, can you?
"Most software development involves a source code repository and is managed by tools such as the Concurrent Versions System," he explained.
"So there is a CVS server out there, and I have a CVS program on my computer.
It allows me to connect to the server and pull down a copy of the code, so I can start working with it and making modifications.
If I think my patch is something I want to share with others, I run a program called Patch, which allows me to create a new file, a compact collection of all the changes.
That is called a patch file, and I can give that file to someone else, and they can apply it to their copy of the code to see what impact that patch has.
If I have the right privileges to the server [which is restricted to a tightly controlled oversight board], I can then take my patch and commit it to the repository and it will become part of the source code.
The CVS server keeps track of everything and who sent in what...
So you might have 'read access' to the repository but not 'com mit access' to change things.
When someone makes a commit to the repository, that patch file gets e-mailed out to all the other developers, and so you get this peer review system after the fact, and if there is some thing wrong, you fix the bug."
So how does this community decide who are trusted members?
"For Apache," said Behlendorf, "we started with eight people who really trusted each other, and as new people showed up at the discussion forum and offered patch files posted to the discussion forum, we would gain trust in others, and that eight grew to over one thousand.
We were the first open-source project to get attention from the business commu nity and get the backing from IBM."
Because of Apache's proficiency at allowing a single-server machine to host thousands of different virtual Web sitesmusic, data, text, pornographyit began to have "a commanding share of the Internet Service Provider market," noted Salon's Leonard.
IBM was trying to sell its own proprietary Web server, called GO, but it gained only a tiny sliver of the market.
Apache proved to be both a better technology and free.
So THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD IBM eventually decided that if it could not beat Apache, it should join Apache.
You have to stop here and imagine this.
The world's biggest computer company decided that its engineers could not best the work of an ad hoc open-source collection of geeks, so they threw out their own technology and decided to go with the geeks!
IBM "initiated contact with me, as I had a somewhat public speaker role for Apache," said Behlendorf.
"IBM said, 'We would like to figure out how we can use [Apache] and not get flamed by the Internet com munity, [how we can] make it sustainable and not just be ripping people off but contributing to the process...' IBM was saying that this new model for software development was trustworthy and valuable, so let's in vest in it and get rid of the one that we are trying to make on our own, which isn't as good."
John Swainson was the senior IBM executive who led the team that approached Apache (he's now chairman of Computer Associates).
He picked up the story: "There was a whole debate going on at the time about open-source, but it was all over the place.
We decided we could deal with the Apache guys because they answered our questions.
We could hold a meaningful conversation with these guys, and we were able to create the [nonprofit] Apache Software Foundation and work out all the issues."
At IBM's expense, its lawyers worked with the Apache group to create a legal framework around it so that there would be no copyright or lia bility problems for companies, like IBM, that wanted to build applica tions on top of Apache and charge money for them.
IBM saw the value in having a standard vanilla Web server architecturewhich allowed heterogeneous computer systems and devices to talk to one another, dis playing e-mail and Web pages in a standard formatthat was constantly being improved for free by an open-source community.
The Apache col laborators did not set out to make free software.
They set out to solve a common problemWeb servingand found that collaborating for free in this open-source manner was the best way to assemble the best brains for the job they needed done.
"When we started working with Apache, there was an apache.org Web site but no formal legal structure, and businesses and informal structures THE WORLD IS FLAT don't coexist well," said Swainson.
"You need to be able to vet the code, sign an agreement, and deal with liability issues.
[Today] anybody can download the Apache code.
The only obligation is that they acknowledge that it came from the site, and if they make any changes that they share them back."
There is an Apache development process that manages the traffic, and you earn your way into that process, added Swainson.
It is something like a pure meritocracy.
When IBM started using Apache, it became part of the community and started making contributions.
Indeed, the one thing the Apache people demanded in return for their collaboration with IBM was that IBM assign its best engineers to join the Apache open-source group and contribute, like everyone else, for free.
"The Apache people were not interested in payment of cash," said Swainson.
"They wanted contribution to the base.
Our engineers came to us and said, These guys who do Apache are good and they are insisting that we contribute good people.'
At first they rejected some of what we contributed.
They said it wasn't up to their standards!
The com pensation that the community expected was our best contribution."
On June 22,1998, IBM announced plans to incorporate Apache into its own new Web server product, named WebSphere.
The way the Apache collaborative community organized itself, whatever you took out of Apache's code and improved on, you had to give back to the whole community.
But you were also free to go out and build a patented com mercial product on top of the Apache code, as IBM did, provided that you included a copyright citation to Apache in your own patent.
In other words, this intellectual commons approach to open-sourcing encour aged people to build commercial products on top of it.
While it wanted the foundation to be free and open to all, it recognized that it would re main strong and fresh if both commercial and noncommercial engineers had an incentive to participate.
Today Apache is one of the most successful open-source tools, pow ering about two-thirds of the Web sites in the world.
And because Apache can be downloaded for free anywhere in the world, people from Russia to South Africa to Vietnam use it to create Web sites.
Those individuals who need or want added capabilities for their Web servers can buy prod ucts like WebSphere, which attach right on top of Apache.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD At the time, selling a product built on top of an open-source program was a risky move on IBM's part.
To its credit, IBM was confident in its abil ity to keep producing differentiated software applications on top of the Apache vanilla.
This model has since been widely adopted, after everyone saw how it propelled IBM's Web server business to commercial leadership in that category of software, generating huge amounts of revenue.
As I will repeat in this book: There is no future in vanilla for most companies in a flat world.
A lot of vanilla making in software and other areas is going to shift to open-source communities.
For most compa nies, the commercial future belongs to those who know how to make the richest chocolate sauce, the sweetest, lightest whipped cream, and the juiciest cherries to sit on top, or how to put them all together into a sundae.
Jack Messman, chairman of the Novell software company, which has now become a big distributor of Linux, the open-source op erating system, atop which Novell attaches gizmos to make it sing and dance just for your company, put it best: "Commercial software com panies have to start operating further up the [software] stack to differ entiate themselves.
The open source community is basically focusing on infrastructure" (Financial Times, June 14, 2004).
The IBM deal was a real watershed.
Big Blue was saying that it be lieved in the open-source model and that with the Apache Web server, this open-source community of engineers had created something that was not just useful and valuable but "best in its class."
That's why the open-source movement has become a powerful flattener, the effects of which we are just beginning to see.
"It is incredibly empowering of indi viduals," Brian Behlendorf said.
"It doesn't matter where you come from or where you aresomeone in India or South America can be just as ef fective using this software or contributing to it as someone in Silicon Valley."
The old model is winner take all: I wrote it, I own itthe stan dard software license model.
"The only way to compete against that," concluded Behlendorf, "is to all become winners."
The other big form of community-developed software is the free soft ware movement.
According to the openknowledge.org Web site, "The free/open source software movement began in the 'hacker' culture of U.S. computer science laboratories (Stanford, Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, THE WORLD IS FLAT and MIT) in the 1960s and 1970s.
The community of programmers was small and close-knit.
Code passed back and forth between the members of the communityif you made an improvement you were expected to sub mit your code to the community of developers.
To withhold code was con sidered gaucheafter all, you benefited from the work of yourfriends,you should return the favor."
The free software movement, however, was and remains inspired by the ethical ideal that software should be free and avail able to all, and it relies on open-source collaboration to help produce the best software possible to be distributed for free.
The primary goal of the free software movement is to get as many people as possible writing, improving, and distributing software for free, out of a conviction that this will empower everyone and free individuals from the grip of global corporations.
In 1984, according to Wikipedia, an MIT researcher and ex-hacker, Richard Stallman, launched the "free software movement" along with an effort to build a free operating system called GNU.
Stallman founded the Free Software Foundation and something called the GNU General Public License (GPL).
The GPL specified that users of the source code could copy, change, or upgrade the code, provided that they made their changes available under the same license as the original code.
In 1991, a student at the University of Helsinki named Linus Torvalds, building off Stallman's initiative, posted his Linux operating system to compete with the Microsoft Windows operating system and invited other pro grammers online to try to improve itfor free.
Since Torvalds's initial post, programmers all over the world have manipulated, added to, ex panded, patched, and improved the GNU/Linux operating system, whose license says anyone can download the source code and improve upon it, but then must make the upgraded version freely available to everybody else.
Torvalds insists that Linux must always be free.
Therefore, commer cial software companies that sell improvements that enhance or adapt Linux have to be careful not to combine and/or distribute any of Linux's copyrighted code in their commercial products.
The General Public License under which Linux code, and other free software, is written and distributed requires that if you combine new code with Linux and redis tribute it, then you are obligated to make the modified or combined work available to the community for free.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Much like Microsoft Windows, Linux offers a family of operating sys tems that can be adapted to run on the smallest desktop computers, lap tops, PalmPilots, and even wristwatches, all the way up to the largest supercomputers and mainframes.
So a kid in India with a cheap PC can learn the inner workings of the same operating system that is running in some of the largest data centers of corporate America.
As I was working on this segment of the book, I went to a picnic one afternoon at the Virginia country home of Pamela and Malcolm Baldwin, whom my wife came to know through her membership on the board of World Learn ing, an educational NGO.
I mentioned in the course of lunch that I was thinking of going to Mali to see just how flat the world looked from its outermost edge the town of Timbuktu.
The Baldwins' son Peter hap pened to be working in Mali as part of something called the GeekCorps, which helps to bring technology to developing countries.
A few days af ter the lunch, I received an e-mail from Pamela telling me that she had consulted with Peter about accompanying me to Timbuktu, and then she added the following, which told me everything I needed to know: "Peter says that his project is creating wireless networks via satellite, mak ing antennas out of plastic soda bottles and mesh from window screens!
Apparently everyone in Mali uses Linux .
."
Only in a flat world would you ever hear such a comment!
The free software movement has become a challenge to Microsoft and some other big global software players.
As Fortune magazine re ported (February 23, 2004), "The availability of this basic, powerful soft ware, which works on Intel's ubiquitous microprocessors, coincided with the explosive growth of the Internet.
Linux soon began to gain a global following among programmers and business users .
The revolution goes far beyond little Linux .
Just about any kind of software [now] can be found in open-source form.
The SourceForge.net website, a meeting place for programmers, lists an astounding 86,000 programs in progress.
Most are minor projects by and for geeks, but hundreds pack real value .
If you hate shelling out $350 for Microsoft Office or $600 for Adobe Photoshop, OpenOffice.org and the Gimp are surprisingly highquality free alternatives."
Big companies like Google, E T r a d e , and Amazon, by combining Intel-based commodity server components and THE WORLD IS FLAT the Linux operating system, have been able to cut their technology spending dramaticallyand get more control over their software.
Truth be told, though, while Linux and Apache began as pure forms of community-developed software, uploaded by self-generating collabo rative communities, it wasn't long before Apache became a kind of "blended model," thanks to its collaboration with IBM.
Some people worked on it for free and others were paid to do so by IBM, so the com pany could sell its own services, upgrades, and attachments around the basic software.
At the same time, we are now seeing venture capitalists actually funding open-source start-upspaying software companies to put out some program for free in the hope that a community will develop around it, so that the start-up company can sell additional bells and whis tles to the community for profit.
Red Hat, for instance, helps support the development of Linux and other open-source solutions and has created a business around it.
Red Hat won't sell you Linux per sethat's not allowedbut for a fee it will provide support and customize Linux for your business.
These blended models are probably the future.
Why?
To begin with, for a complex software platform to be sustainablethat is, to be con stantly freshened, debugged, and improvedthere has to be an econ omy around it.
Talented open-source community software developers have only so much time, inclination, energy, and resources to put into developing code for free.
At some point, the work won't go on at the highest level if there isn't some economic incentive for someone in the community.
In the case of Linux, it is wonderful that people in Mali can download the software for free, but Linux is not really being developed for free any more.
One should not get too romantic about all this.
IBM does not sell an operating system that competes with Linux.
But IBM sells software that competes with Microsoft's.
So IBM is very happy to pay quality software engineers to work on Linux in order to encourage its expansion as a com petitor to Microsoft Windowsand thereby cut into Microsoft's profits, weakening its ability to compete with IBM in its areas of specialty.
Sun Microsystems set up OpenOffice.org for the same reason.
As the Sun Web site puts it: "The OpenOffice.org community was founded by Sun Micro- THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD systems in 2000.
An active community, of which Sun is a key member, enhances and supports the OpenOffice.org office suite."
Hey, that's busi ness.
But it is business.
The important thing, from the consumer's point of view, is that these blended models of community-developed software are driving more competition and producing cheaper, if not free, software for the public.
Needless to say, the whole notion of community-developed software is hotly debated around Microsoft.
Given the company's centrality in the software business, I thought it was important to hear its side of the story.
Here's what I took away from my discussions in Redmond: In Microsoft's view, the blended model that has evolved out of the community software movement is really just a new form of commercial competition, and no one should have any illusions about it.
Whatever the founders of the community-developed software movement may have intended or hoped forin terms of profit-free community-developed softwarethat is not what has actually developed.
Community-based software development is now a business, one that holds potential for Microsoft as for every other company.
Having said that, the Microsoft executives I spoke with still believe that this form of software has its limitations and will not, or should not, make the traditional, commercial software industry obsoletefor several reasons.
To begin with, Microsoft argues that if innovators are not going to be financially rewarded for their innovations, the incentive for pathbreaking innovation will eventually dry up and so will the money for the really deep R & D that is required to drive progress in this increasingly complex field.
Microsoft's success in creating the standard PC operating system produced the bankroll that allowed Microsoft to spend billions of dollars on R & D to develop Microsoft Office, a whole suite of applica tions that it can now sell for a couple hundred dollars.
As Craig Mundie, the Microsoft chief technical officer, put it: "The virtuous cycle of inno vation, reward, reinvestment, and more innovation is what has driven all big breakthroughs in our industry.
The software business as we have known it is a scale economic business.
You spend a ton of money up front to develop a software product, and then the marginal cost of producing each one is very small, but if you sell a lot of them, you make back your THE WORLD IS FLAT investment and then plow profits back into developing the next genera tion.
But when you insist that you cannot charge for software, you can only give it away, you take the software business away from being a scale economic business."
He continued: "It is true that scientific research will increasingly require more of a community effort, but I would argue this is more of a requirement for multidisciplinary collaboration due to the com plexity of the problems, rather than a belief that the fundamental insights that lead to real innovation come from groups now rather than individu als.
I believe that open-source will continue as a powerful trend but will revert primarily to the intellectual commons model that has long been with us in academia, rather than one that removes the financial incentive to do software."
As for Microsoft's founder Bill Gates, he too is obviously convinced that the future of software is not in free.
"You need capitalism [to drive innovation].
To have [a movement] that says innovation does not deserve an economic reward is contrary to where the world is going.
When I talk to the Chinese, they dream of starting a company.
They are not thinking, 1 will be a barber during the day and do free software at night.'.
When you have a security crisis in your [software] system, you don't want to say, 'Where is the guy at the barbershop?'
" Mundie also points out that no matter what business you are in, "sooner or later you are likely to find that without some proprietary software and IT system that embodies and facilitates your core competencythe unique essence of what you do it is going to be very hard to gain and sustain an edge on your competition in a world where everyone can get all the same free software."
Companies will want systems designed just for them that no one else has or they will want IT tool kits to design things for themselves that no one else has.
As such, says Microsoft, there will still be plenty of room for proprietary software systems.
Finally, scale and scope do matter.
There is a big advantage to students and companies that you can go any where in the world today, fire up a computer, and find a standardized Microsoft Word program to write your business report or essay on.
I would not want to have to wrestle with a different word processing pro gram everywhere I went.
That would not help work flow.
But the reason I think community-developed software is also here to stay is that while it may not be sustainable without an economic in- THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD centive at some point, as a sheer tool for making breakthroughs and spreading those breakthroughs virally, it has proved to be very powerful.
Until 2004, the Linux operating system was the best-known opensource software challenging Microsoft.
Then, in November 2004, the Mozilla Foundation, a nonprofit group supporting open-source soft ware, released Firefox, a free, fast, easy-to-install Web browser loaded with features that Microsoft's Internet Explorer lacked.
"Just over a month later," wrote New York Times technology writer Randall Stross (December 19, 2004), "the foundation celebrated a remarkable mile stone: 10 million downloads."
Donations from Firefox's appreciative new users paid for a two-page advertisement in The New York Times.
"With Firefox," Stross added, "open-source software moves from backoffice obscurity to your home, and to your parents', too.
(Your children in college are already using it.)
It is polished [and] as easy to use as Internet Explorer."
By November 2005, its first anniversary, the Firefox browser had gobbled up roughly 10 percent of the worldwide browser market, most of it coming out of Microsoft Explorer's hide.
One reason Firefox spread so fast is its community-development aspect: Users could contribute to how it developed, and many extensions that added specific new applications to the browser were written by users.
By No vember 2005, a new souped-up version, Firefox 1.5, was on the march.
This explosive growth is quite amazing when you realize how Firefox came about.
Firefox is actually a descendant of Mosaic and the original Netscape Navigator browser, which was overwhelmed by Microsoft Internet Explorer in 1998.
While Firefox, like any other piece of opensource software, is the product of many different programmers' improve ments and insights, noted Wired magazine (February 2005), "two people in particular are most responsible for the browser's success: Blake Ross, an angular hyper-kinetic 19-year-old Stanford sophomore with spikey black hair, and Ben Goodger, a stout, soft-spoken 24-year-old New Zealander.
At age 14, Ross, logging on to his family's America Online ac count, started fixing bugs for the Mozilla Group, a cadre of programmers responsible for maintaining the source code of Netscape's browsers.
Ross quickly became disenchanted with Netscape's feature creep [too many bells and whistles], and in 2002 he brashly decided to splinter off and THE WORLD IS FLAT develop a pared-down, fast, easy-to-use browser.
Goodger... took the reins when Ross became a full-time college student in 2003.
Goodger pulled the project's loose ends together and whipped the browser into shape for the release of Firefox 1.0 late last year [2004]."
So a nineteen-year-old from Stanford and a twenty-four-year-old from New Zealand, working in an open-source community for free, starting from two ends of the world, produced a browser that took 5 percent of the Internet Explorer market in about six months.
I particularly liked what Ross told Wired about how it felt when hefirststarted uploading, when he first started hacking away at Mozilla as a ninth grader: "It was incredible just realizing that you can touch something that so many people use.
It's a great feeling to make a little change to the code and then actually see the change in the window of a big famous product.
You've caused some thing to happen in an application that's being used all over the world."
There is no better description of the allure of uploadingas opposed to just downloading.
B ottom line: The flattening of the world is producing another big shakeout in the software business.
In time, I think we will see a new equilibrium emerge in which all the different forms of software will have a place: traditional commercial software,  la Microsoft or SAP, along with the Business Web model of rent-a-software,  la Salesforce.com, along with free software produced either by funded communities or by inspired individuals.
COMMUNITY-DEVELOPED ANSWERS Brian Behlendorf, for his part, is betting his career that more and more people and companies will want to take advantage of the new flat-world platform to do community-developed innovation of all sorts of products.
In 2004, he started a new company called CollabNet to promote the use of community development as a tool to drive software innovation within companies.
What CollabNet does, for example, is to create a secure Web THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD site, where those with a password can go and see the source code of the software and the defects that need to be addressed, and then participate in a discussion among engineers, product managers, and customer support on how the software should be improved.
It is a totally flat, low-friction en vironment to enhance collaboration and overcome obstacles.
"CollabNet is an arms dealer to the forces flattening the world," said Behlendorf.
"Our role in this world is to build the tools and infrastructure so that an individual in India, China, or whereveras a consultant, an em ployee, or just someone sitting at home, can collaborate.
We are giving them the tool kit for decentralized collaborative development.
We are enabling bottom-up development, and not just in cyberspace."
While CollabNet is primarily focused on how to enable a corporation to col laborate internally to produce its own open-source software and keep it fresh, there are a variety of businesses besides software that are now dis covering what happens if you can tap the innovative power of the com munity.
One creative variation on this open-source approach was the attempt a couple of years ago by a Canadian gold-mining company, Goldcorp Inc., to try to tap "all of us" to find its gold deposits.
According to the June 2002 issue of Fast Company.
In January 1848, a work crew at John Sutter's mill, near Sacramento, California, came across a few select nuggets of gold.
Before long, a half-million prospectors arrived there seeking in stant riches.
The gold rush was on.
Some 153 years later, another gold rush broke out at an old mine called Red Lake, in northwest ern Ontario.
This time, the fortune hunters wielded geologicalmodeling software and database mining tools rather than picks and shovels.
The big winners were from Australia.
And they had never even seen the mine.
Rob McEwen, chairman and C E O of Goldcorp Inc., based in Toronto, had triggered the gold rush by issuing an extraordinary challenge to the world's geologists: We'll show you all of our data on the Red Lake mine online if you tell us where we're likely to find the next 6 million ounces of gold.
The prize: a total of $575,000, with a top award of $105,000.
THE WORLD IS FLAT The mining community was flabbergasted.
"We've seen very large data sets from government surveys online," says Nick Archibald, managing director of Fractal Graphics, the winning organization from West Perth, Australia.
"But for a company to post that information and say, 'Here I am, warts and all,' is quite unusual indeed."
McEwen knew that the contest, which he called the Goldcorp Challenge, entailed big risks.
For one thing, it exposed the com pany to a hostile-takeover bid.
But the risks of continuing to do things the old way were even greater.
"Mining is one of humanity's oldest industrial pursuits," McEwen says.
"This is old old econ omy.
But a mineral discovery is like a technological discovery.
There's the same rapid creation of wealth as rising expectations improve profitability.
If we could find gold faster, we could really improve the value of the company."
McEwen, a small, soft-spoken man with a neatly trimmed mustache and meticulous tailoring, had one big advantage over his slow-footed competitors: He wasn't a miner, he didn't think like a miner, and he wasn't constrained by a miner's conven tional wisdom.
As a young man, he went to work for Merrill Lynch, following his father into the investment business.
But his father also had a fascination with gold, and McEwen grew up hearing tales of miners, prospectors, and grubstakes at the din ner table.
Soon he was bitten by the gold bug too, and he ham mered out a template of what he thought a 21st-century gold-mining company should look like.
In 1989, he saw his chance.
He stepped into a takeover battle as a white knight and emerged as majority owner of an old and underperforming mine in Ontario.
It was hardly a dream come true.
The gold market was de pressed.
The mine's operating costs were high.
The miners went on strike.
McEwen even got a death threat.
But the new owner knew that the mine had potential.
"The Red Lake gold district had 2 operating gold mines and 13 former mines that had pro duced more than 18 million ounces combined," he says.
"The THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD mine next door had produced about 10 million ounces.
Ours had produced only 3 million."
McEwen believed that the high-grade ore that ran through the neighboring mine was present in parts of the 55,000-acre Red Lake stakeif only he could find it.
His strategy began to take shape at a seminar at MIT in 1999.
Company presidents from around the world had come there to learn about advances in in formation technology.
Eventually, the group's attention turned to the Linux operating system and the open-source revolution.
"I said, 'Open-source code!
That's what I want!'"
McEwen recalls.
His reasoning: If he could attract the attention of world-class talent to the problem of finding more gold in Red Lake, just as Linux managed to attract world-class programmers to the cause of better software, he could tap into thousands of minds that he wouldn't normally have access to.
He could also speed up explo ration and improve his odds of discovery.
At first, Goldcorp's geologists were appalled at the idea of ex posing their super-secret data to the world.
"This is a very conser vative, very private industry," says Dr. James M. Franklin, former chief geoscientist for the Geological Survey of Canada and a judge in the Goldcorp Challenge.
"Confidentiality and secrecy about reserves and exploration have been its watchwords.
This was a totally unconventional thing to do."
But in March 2000, at an industry meeting, McEwen un veiled the Goldcorp Challenge.
The external response was im mediate.
More than 1,400 scientists, engineers, and geologists from 50 countries downloaded the company's data and started their virtual exploration.
When the entries started coming in, the panel of five judges was astonished by the creativity of the sub missions.
The top winner was a collaboration by two groups in Australia: Fractal Graphics, in West Perth, and Taylor Wall & Associates, in Queensland, which together had developed a pow erful 3-D graphical depiction of the mine.
For McEwen, the contest itself was a gold mine.
"We have drilled four of the winners' top five targets and have hit on all THE WORLD IS FLAT four," he says.
"But what's really important is that from a remote site, the winners were able to analyze a database and generate tar gets without ever visiting the property.
It's clear that this is part of the future."
Between the new high-grade discoveries and the mine's mod ernized facilities, Red Lake is finally performing along the lines that McEwen had envisioned.
In 1996, Red Lake was producing at an annual rate of 53,000 ounces at $360 an ounce.
By 2001, the mine was producing 504,000 ounces at $59 an ounce.
As for the open-source miners who won the competition, Fast Company noted how much this opportunity meant for them as well: Red Lake, Ontario and West Perth, Australia are at opposite ends of the earth.
But that didn't stop Nick Archibald and his team of geologists at Fractal Graphics, an Australian geoscience consult ing firm, from thinking that they could find gold in Canada.
First-place winners of the 2001 Goldcorp Challenge, Archi bald and his mates shared a grand prize of $105,000 for their pre sentation detailing likely targets for finding gold.
"I'd never been to the mine," Archibald says.
"I'd never even been to Canada."
But when he learned of the contest, Archibald recognized an opportunity for his company, which specializes in the production of 3-D models of m i n e s .
Although the prize money, which Archibald's team shared with Taylor Wall & Associates, barely covered the cost of the project, the publicity has boosted the firm's business.
"It would have taken us years to get the recognition in North America that this project gave us overnight," he says.
More important, Archibald adds, the Challenge has opened the industry's eyes to a new way of doing exploration.
"This has been a big change for mining," he says.
"This has been like a bea con in a sea of darkness."
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD BLOGGING: UPLOADING NEWS AND COMMENTARY Soon after the community-developed software movement gained momen tum, we witnessed the emergence of another bottom-up, self-organized form of uploading: blogging.
I see this most vividly in my own profession, journalism, where bloggers, one-person online commentators, who of ten link to one another depending on their ideology, have created a kind of open-source newsroom.
A blog is your own personal virtual soapbox, where you can get up every morning and, in the form of a column or a newsletter or just a screed, tell the world what you think about any sub ject, upload that content onto your own Web site, and then wait for the world to come check it out.
If others like it, they will link to your blog from their blog or to other kinds of content, like online news articles or commentaries.
I now read bloggers (the term comes from the word "Weblog") as part of my daily information-gathering routine.
In an arti cle about how a tiny group of relatively obscure news bloggers helped to blow the whistle that exposed the bogus documents used by CBS News's Dan Rather in his infamous report about President George W. Bush's Air National Guard service, Howard Kurtz of The Washington Post wrote (September 20, 2004), "It was like throwing a match on kerosene-soaked wood.
The ensuing blaze ripped through the media establishment as previously obscure bloggers managed to put the network of Murrow and Cronkite firmly on the defensive.
The secret, says [Web designer and blogger] Charles Johnson, is 'open-source intelligence gathering.'
Meaning: 'We've got a huge pool of highly motivated people who go out there and use tools to find stuff.
We've got an army of citizen journalists out there.'"
That army is often armed with nothing more than a tape recorder, a camera-enabled cell phone, and a Web site, but in a flat world it can col lectively get its voice heard as far and wide as CBS or The New York Times.
These bloggers have created their own online commons, with no barriers to entry.
That open commons often has many rumors and wild allegations swirling in it.
Because no one is in charge, standards of practice vary wildly, and some of it is downright irresponsible.
But because no one is in charge, information flows with total freedom.
And when this community THE WORLD IS FLAT is onto something real, like the Rather episode, it can create as much en ergy, buzz, and hard news as any network or major newspaper.
A new blog is created every seven seconds, according to Technorati.com, a site that tracks these easily updated Web journals.
Technorati says there are more than twenty-four million blogs already, and the number is growing at about seventy thousand a day and doubling every five monthsfrom Iraqi bloggers, who give their own take on news from the front, to bloggers who follow and critique golf course architecture, to poker bloggers, invest ment bloggers, to just plain you and me bloggers.
Mark Glaser, a freelance writer based in San Francisco, writing for the Web site YaleGlobal Online (July 28, 2005), noted that on July 7, the day of the London underground bombings, the BBC Web site in vited viewers and listeners to send in photos of what they had seen.
"In 24 hours," he wrote, "the site received 20,000 written accounts via e-mail, 1,000 photos, and 20 videos.
One of the site's main images that day was an amateur photo of the scene of the double-decker bus bombing.
The BBC, the Guardian, and MSNBC.com were among the big media sites that walked the walk of citizen journalism, allowing their readers to become contributors on a moment's noticewith zero journalistic training."
The BBC was both harnessing the power of uploading and channeling it into useful editorial content.
The BBC's willingness to open itself to bloggers shows both the strength and weakness of blogging, and why it is still not clear how it will affect traditional journalism.
Who can digest twenty thousand blogs in twenty-four hours?
You cannot drink your news from a fire hose.
It is just too overwhelming.
So, as with software, what we are likely to see are more blended approaches, in which traditional news organizations ab sorb, filter, and select the best from the blogosphere, and blend it with their more traditionally edited news.
(Today, major corporations, such as General Electric, monitor and respond daily to what the blogs are saying about them.)
It is impossible to imagine what it is going to be like in ten years when virtually everyone you know has a blog.
But that is where we are heading.
If you look at the Facebook.com phenomenon, an online social directory spreading virally in high schools and colleges, millions of young people now have a platform for telling their own stories.
THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD "The next generation is growing up online, rather than adapting to it in their mid-adult years," Micah Sifry, an analyst of the intersection between technology and politics, wrote in The Nation (November 22, 2004).
"More than 2 million children aged 6-17 have their own Web site, ac cording to a December 2003 survey by Grunwald Associates.
Twentynine percent of kids in grades K-3 have their own e-mail address.
Josh Koenig, one of the twenty-somethings who cut their teeth at the Dean campaign and now a co-founder of Music for America, says, 'We're only seeing the first drips of what is going to be a downpour.'
When he told me that in most high schools in America, students are using the Web to rank their teachers, I thought that was a bit of hyperbole.
But then I discovered RateMyTeachers.com, where more than 6 million ratings have been posted by students on more than 900,000 teachers at 40,000 American and Canadian middle and high schools.
That's almost triple the number from one year ago, covering about 85% of all the schools in both coun tries .
The future is in their hands, though the rest of us will be taken along for the ride."
The audio version of blogging, known as "podcasting," has really taken off.
The phenomenon evolved with Apple's wildly popular hand held audio player, the iPod.
Podcasts involve individuals and companies producing their own audio and video files music, commentary, books, poetry readings, singing recitals, anything you can imagine that can be done by voice or videowhich can then be uploaded onto platforms, like Apple iTunes.
These podcasts are then downloaded by users or sub scribers, who listen to them or watch them on their computer, iPod, MP3 player, cell phone, or other portable device.
Podcasting is having a big impact on traditional music and video companies and radio stations, because so many people now have the power to become video and mu sic producers, not just passive listeners and viewers.
The video-sharing site YouTube illustrates just how popular upload ing has become.
YouTube was founded by some former employees of PayPal in February 2005, just after the first edition of this book was com pleted.
In October 2006, not long after the second edition of this book came out, YouTube was sold to Google for $1.65 billion.
The YouTube Web site enables users to upload, view, and share videos, parts of movies, THE WORLD IS FLAT T V clips, music videos, lectures, or comic performances made by them selves or others.
In effect, it enables any amateur to become a network or movie studio and develop a following.
And, indeed, some YouTube artists now have huge audiences.
It would be impossible to catalog all the uses of YouTube (even terror ist organizations are now using it to spread their messages).
My favorites are those that underscore just how much uploading is empowering the lit tle guys and gals.
Consider the following story from The New York Times Magazine (December 10, 2006): "As long as there have been personal fouls and holding penalties, sports fans have vilified referees for making bad calls.
But in recent years, criticizing the officials of the major profes sional and college sports has evolved from a crude art form'Ref, if you had one more eye you'd be a cyclops!
Go back to Foot Locker!
'to an ef ficient science.
Instant replay and multiple camera angles have exposed even the tiniest officiating errors.
And with the rise of YouTube, sophisti cated methods of scrutinizing, publicizing and condemning those errors have emerged.
These days, just hours after the end of a game marred by questionable officiating, fans of the aggrieved team take to the Web, col lecting clips of bad calls and stringing them together into short videos.
Sometimes a single egregious error is isolated and repeated over and overa shaming strategy that has a certain heavy-handed and humiliating power.
Many of the clips use slow-motion analysis, a feature that led a writer at Slate magazine to dub the genre 'the YouTube Zapruder film.'
The most persuasive videos are those that edit down the footage of an en tire game to only its controversial calls.
A few minutes of watching how seemingly every decision in Game 5 of the Dallas Mavericks-Houston Rockets playoff series last year was overly generous to Dallas can turn even the most indifferent observer into a conspiracy theorist.
The officiating blunder that seemed to inspire the most videos this year was the fourthquarter onside kick that helped decide the Oregon-Oklahoma football game.
While Oregon was judged to have recovered the ball, the replay clearly shows that the call should have favored Oklahoma.
The response on YouTube was swift and vitriolic.
'Cheaters!'
was the title of one video.
Another was called 'The Officiating That Changed My Philosophy on Life.'
Sports leagues have started to fight back.
The NFL recently asked THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD YouTube to take down thousands of videos containing footage of its games, including many that were critical of the officiating."
WIKIPEDIA: COMMUNITY-UPLOADED CONTENT Another form of uploaded community development that I used regularly in writing this book is Wikipedia, the user-contributed online encyclo pedia, also known as "the people's encyclopedia."
The word "wiki" is taken from the Hawaiian word for "quick."
Wikis are Web sites that allow users to directly edit any Web page on their own from their home com puter.
In a May 5, 2004, essay on YaleGlobal Online, Andrew Lih, an as sistant professor at the Journalism and Media Studies Centre at the University of Hong Kong, explained how Wikipedia works and why it is such a breakthrough.
"The Wikipedia project was started by Jimmy Wales, head of Internet startup Bomis.com, after his original project for a volunteer, but strictly controlled, free encyclopedia ran out of money and resources after two years," wrote Lih.
"Editors with Ph.D. degrees were at the helm of the project then, but it produced only a few hundred articles.
Not wanting the content to languish, Wales placed the pages on a wiki Web site in January 2001 and invited any Internet visitors to edit or add to the col lection.
The site became a runaway success in the first year and gained a loyal following, generating over 20,000 articles and spawning over a dozen language translations."
How, you might ask, does one produce a credible, balanced encyclo pedia by way of an ad hoc open-source, open-editing movement?
After all, every article in the Wikipedia has an "Edit this page" button, allowing anyone who surfs along to add or delete content on that page.
Its success starts with the fact, Lih explained, that "because wikis provide the ability to track the status of articles, review individual changes, and discuss issues, they function as social software.
Wiki Web sites also track and store every modification made to an article, so no operation is ever permanently de structive.
Wikipedia works by consensus, with users adding and modifying content while trying to reach common ground along the way.
THE WORLD IS FLAT "However, the technology is not enough on its own," wrote Lih.
"Wales created an editorial policy of maintaining a neutral point of view (NPOV) as the guiding principle .
According to Wikipedia's guide lines, T h e neutral point of view attempts to present ideas and facts in such a fashion that both supporters and opponents can agree .
.'
As a result, articles on contentious issues such as globalization have bene fited from the cooperative and global nature of Wikipedia.
Over the last two years, the entry has had more than 90 edits by contributors from the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, United Kingdom, Australia, Brazil, United States, Malaysia, Japan and China.
It provides a mani fold view of issues from the World Trade Organization and multina tional corporations to the anti-globalization movement and threats to cultural diversity."
A Newsweek piece on Wikipedia (November 1, 2004) quoted Angela Beesley, a volunteer contributor from Essex, England, and self-confessed Wikipedia addict who monitors the accuracy of more than one thousand entries: "A collaborative encyclopedia sounds like a crazy idea, but it naturally controls itself."
It certainly sells itself.
By the end of 2005, Wikipedia was getting 2.5 billion page views a month, which made it one of the most visited refer ence sites on the Web, along with Dictionary.com.
I am sure you thought it was great when you were growing up and the Encyclopaedia Britannica salesperson came to your door, showing off those big books.
I sure did.
Then you really thought it was cool when you got yourfirstcopy of Encarta with Microsoft Windows and could click on to your own en cyclopedia.
The online ad for the latest edition of Encarta reads as fol lows: "Microsoft Encarta Standard 2006 is the number-one best-selling encyclopedia brand.
It's a source you can trust for exploring a world of knowledge that's accurate, engaging, and up to datewith over 36,000 articles, tens of thousands of pictures and sound clips, videos, anima tions, games, maps, and more."
Do you know how many articles there are in Wikipedia, the uploaded encyclopedia?
As I write these words on November 29, 2005, the Wikipedia.org Web site reported: "In this En glish version, started in 2001, we are currently working on 841,358 arti cles"and counting.
And Wales is just getting started.
He has expanded into Wiktionary, a dictionary and thesaurus; Wikibooks, digital textbooks THE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD and manuals; Wikiquote, an online "book" of quotations; Wikispecies, a cyber-directory of species; and, of course, Wikinews, the free-content news source that you can write and upload yourself.
Wikipedia, though, is not all sweetness and light, and it does not al ways control itself.
When the people can upload their own encyclope dia, lots of things can happen, and not all of them good.
Your enemies can use it as a global poster board to smear your name if they want, and it can take time to sort out.
John Seigenthaler Sr., the founding editor ial director of USA Today and founder of the Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, woke up one morning and found his bio on Wikipedia as follows: "John Seigenthaler Sr. was the assistant to Attorney General Robert Kennedy in the early 1960's.
For a brief time, he was thought to have been directly involved in the Kennedy assassinations of both John, and his brother, Bobby.
Nothing was ever proven."
He was not amused.
That bio entry was being read and repeated all over the world.
On November 29, 2005, he wrote the following in an op-ed piece in USA Today.
This is a highly personal story about Internet character assassina tion.
It could be your story.
I have no idea whose sick mind conceived the false, malicious "biography" that appeared under my name for 132 days on Wiki pedia, the popular, online, free encyclopedia whose authors are unknown and virtually untraceable.
There was more: "John Seigenthaler moved to the Soviet Union in 1971, and re turned to the United States in 1984," Wikipedia said.
"He started one of the country's largest public relations firms shortly thereafter."
At age 78,1 thought I was beyond surprise or hurt at anything negative said about me.
I was wrong.
One sentence in the biogra phy was true.
I was Robert Kennedy's administrative assistant in the early 1960s.
I also was his pallbearer.
It was mind-boggling when my son, John Seigenthaler, journalist with NBC News, phoned later to say he found the same scurrilous text on Reference.com and Answers.com.
THE WORLD IS FLAT I had heard for weeks from teachers, journalists and historians about "the wonderful world of Wikipedia," where millions of people worldwide visit daily for quick reference "facts," composed and posted by people with no special expertise or knowledge and sometimes by people with malice.
At my request, executives of the three websites now have re moved the false content about me.
But they don't know, and can't find out, who wrote the toxic sentences.
I phoned Jimmy Wales, Wikipedia's founder, and asked, "Do you .
have any way to know who wrote that?"
"No, we don't," he said.
Representatives of the other two web sites said their computers are programmed to copy data verbatim from Wikipedia, never checking whether it is false or factual... We live in a universe of new media with phenomenal oppor tunities for worldwide communications and researchbut popu lated by volunteer vandals with poison-pen intellects.
Congress has enabled them and protects them.
When I was a child, my mother lectured me on the evils of "gossip."
She held a feather pillow and said, "If I tear this open, the feathers will fly to the four winds, and I could never get them back in the pillow.
That's how it is when you spread mean things about people."
For me, that pillow is a metaphor for Wikipedia.
I like Wikipedia.
I have used it in writing this book.
But I use it with the knowledge that the community is not always right, the network doesn't always self-correctcertainly not as fast as its errors can get spread.
It is not an accident that IBM today has a senior staffer who po lices Wikipedia's references to IBM and makes sure that everything that gets in there is correct.
More young people will learn about IBM from Wikipedia in coming years than from IBM itself.
My bottom line is this: Uploading, by individuals or communities, is al ready a huge flattener.
It is spreading because the flat-world platform that makes it possible is spreading and because uploading responds to a very deep human longing for individuals to participate and make their voices heard.
New York Times reporter Seth Schiesel wrote a telling piece in this regard (June 21, 2005), in which he noted that growing numbers of young men "would rather play a sports video game than watch the real thing on television."
He pointed out that since 2000, sales of sports video games in the United States have risen by 34 percent, to $1.2 billion in 2004, while television broadcast ratings for almost all ma jor sports have fallen among male viewers between twelve and thirtyfour.
But what struck me most about the article was a quote Schiesel had from a young man who loved to play the NBA-branded video bas ketball games, in which you can control when the players (patterned af ter actual NBA players) pass and shoot: "1 like Kobe, O.K.?'
Albert Arce said, referring to Kobe Bryant, the Los Angeles Lakers star.
'But I like to play him because I can make him pass to the other guys.
When I see him on TV, it's like he doesn't know how to pass.'"
He would rather play Kobe than watch Kobe!
That attitude, says Micah Sifry, "is indicative of the larger shift in the Internet age away from a static and passive approach to media to an active and participatory ap roach.
It is more fun to be in the game than to watch the game."
Tim 'Reilly, the founder and C E O of O'Reilly Media, one of the world's remier computer book publishers, has his own way of describing the ploading phenomenon.
He calls it the "architecture of participation" ystems that are designed for users to produce, not just consume.
He sug ests that the companies that design their software, their systems, their eb sites, and their encyclopedias to encourage participation will be the nes that draw the most users.
eople like to upload, and that is why of all the ten forces flattening he world, uploading has the potential to be the most disruptive.
Just ow many people will exercise that ability to be in the game, and how oon, is what will determine just how disruptive uploading becomes.
HE WORLD IS FLAT The act of participating is like a muscle you have to use," noted Sifry, and we are so unused to being active participants in the process that ven though the tools are there now many people don't use them .
here are also still deeply ingrained habits of deference to authority and nstitutions."
In short, the number of uploaders is still relatively small.
ut as the tools for individual uploading and collaboration become ore diffused, and as more and more people get positive feedback from heir uploading experiences, I am certain every big institution or hierar hical structure will feel the effects.
ou have been warned.
l A T T I N , R / 5 UTSOURCING 2K  dia has had its ups and downs since it achieved independence on ugust 15,1947, but in some ways it might be remembered as the luck est country in the history of the late twentieth century.
ntil recently, India was what is known in the banking world as "the econd buyer."
You always want to be the second buyer in businessthe erson who buys the hotel or the golf course or the shopping mall after he first owner has gone bankrupt and its assets are being sold by the bank t ten cents on the dollar.
Well, the first buyers of all the cable laid by all hose fiber-optic cable companieswhich thought they were going to et endlessly rich in an endlessly expanding digital universewere their merican shareholders.
When the bubble burst, they were left holding ither worthless or much diminished stock.
The Indians, in effect, got to e the second buyers of the fiber-optics companies.
hey didn't actually purchase the sharesthey just benefited from he overcapacity in fiber optics, which meant that they and their merican clients got to use all that cable practically for free.
This was a uge stroke of luck for India (and to a lesser degree for China, the former oviet Union, and Eastern Europe), because what is the history of mod- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD rn India?
While India certainly had natural resources to mine (coal, ron ore, diamonds), with so many mouths to feed, it couldn't just live off hem not even close.
So instead India mined the brains of its own peo le, educating a relatively large slice of its elites in the sciences, engi eering, and medicine.
In 1951, to his enduring credit, Jawaharlal ehru, India's first prime minister, set up the first of India's seven Indian nstitutes of Technology (IIT) in the eastern city of Kharagpur.
In the ifty-five years since then, hundreds of thousands of Indians have com eted to gain entry and then graduate from these IITs and their privatesector equivalents (as well as the six Indian Institutes of Management, hich teach business administration).
Given India's one-billion-plus opulation, this competition produces a phenomenal knowledge meri ocracy.
It's like a factory, churning out and exporting some of the most ifted engineering, computer science, and software talent on the globe.
his, alas, was one of the few things India did right.
Because its often ysfunctional political system, coupled with Nehru's preference for proSoviet, Socialist economics, ensured that up until the mid-1990s India ould not provide good jobs for most of those talented engineers.
So merica got to be the second buyer of India's brainpower!
If you were a mart, educated Indian, the only way you could fulfill your potential was y leaving the country and, ideally, going to America, where some wenty-five thousand graduates of India's top engineering schools have ettled since 1953, greatly enriching America's knowledge pool thanks to heir education, which was subsidized by Indian taxpayers.
The IITs became islands of excellence by not allowing the general ebasement of the Indian system to lower their exacting standards," noted he Wall Street Journal (April 16, 2003).
"You couldn't bribe your way to et into an IIT .
Candidates are accepted only if they pass a grueling en rance exam.
The government does not interfere with the curriculum, nd the workload is demanding .
Arguably, it is harder to get into an IIT han into Harvard or the Massachusetts Institute of Technology... IIT lumnus Vinod Khosla, who co-founded Sun Microsystems, said: 'When  finished IIT Delhi and went to Carnegie Mellon for my Masters, I hought I was cruising all the way because it was so easy relative to the ed cation I got at IIT' " HE WORLD IS FLAT or most of their first fifty years, these IITs were one of the greatest argains America ever had.
It was as if someone installed a brain drain hat filled up in New Delhi and emptied in Palo Alto.
Roughly one of our IIT grads ended up in the United Statesso many that the merican IIT expats have their own organization in the United States nd hold an annual convention here.
nd then along came Netscape, the 1996 telecom deregulation, and lobal Crossing and its fiber-optic friends.
The world got flattened and hat whole deal got turned on its head.
"India had no resources and no nfrastructure," said Dinakar Singh, one of the most respected young edge fund managers on Wall Street, whose parents graduated from an IT and then immigrated to America, where he was bom.
"It produced eople with quality and by quantity.
But many of them rotted on the ocks of India like vegetables.
Only a relative few could get on ships and et out.
Not anymore, because we built this ocean crosser, called fiber ptic cable .
For decades you had to leave India to be a profes ional .
Now you can plug into the world from India.
You don't have to o to Yale and go to work for Goldman Sachs [as I did.]"
ndia could never have afforded to pay for the bandwidth to connect rainy India with high-tech America, so American shareholders paid for t. Sure, overinvestment can be good.
The overinvestment in railroads urned out to be a great boon for the American economy.
"But the rail oad overinvestment was confined to your own country and so too were he benefits," said Singh.
In the case of the digital railroads, "it was the oreigners who benefited."
India got to ride for free.
t is fun to talk to Indians who were around at precisely the moment hen American companies started to discover they could draw on India's rainpower in India.
One of them is Vivek Paul, now the president of ipro, the Indian software giant.
"In many ways the Indian information echnology [outsourcing] revolution began with General Electric com ng over.
We're talking the late 1980s and early '90s.
At the time, Texas nstruments was doing some chip design in India.
Some of their key de igners [in America] were Indians, and they basically let them go back ome and work from there [using the rather crude communications etworks that existed then to stay in touch].
At that time, I was heading HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD p the operations for G E Medical Systems in Bangalore.
[GE's chair an] Jack Welch came to India in 1989 and was completely taken by ndia as a source of intellectual advantage for GE.
Jack would say, 'India s a developing country with a developed intellectual capability.'
He saw  talent pool that could be leveraged.
So he said, 'We spend a lot of oney doing software.
Couldn't we do some work for our IT department ere?'
" Because India had closed its market to foreign technology com anies, like IBM, Indian companies had started their own factories to ake PCs and servers, and Welch felt that if they could do it for them elves, they could do it for G E .
o pursue the project, Welch sent a team headed by GE's chief in ormation officer over to India to check out the possibilities.
Paul was lso filling in as GE's business development manager for India at the ime.
"So it was my job to escort the corporate CIO, in early 1990, on his irst trip," he recalled.
"They had come with some pilot projects to get he ball rolling.
I remember in the middle of the night going to pick hem up at the Delhi airport with a caravan of Indian cars, Ambassadors, ased on a very dated 1950s Morris Minor design.
Everyone in the gov rnment drove one.
So we had a five-car caravan and we were driving ack from the airport to town.
I was in the back car, and at one point we eard this loud bang, and I thought, What happened?
I shot to the front, nd the lead car's hood had flown off and smashed the windshieldwith hese GE people inside!
So this whole caravan of G E execs pulls over to he side of the road, and I could just hear them saying to themselves, This is the place we're going to get software from?'"
rtunately for India, the G E team was not discouraged by the poor uality of Indian cars.
G E decided to sink roots, starting a joint de elopment project with Wipro.
Other companies were trying different odels.
But this was still pre-fiber-optic days.
Simon & Schuster, the ook publisher, for instance, would ship its books over to India and pay ndians $50 a month (compared to $1,000 a month in the United States) o type them by hand into computers, converting the books into digitized lectronic files that could be edited or amended easily in the future HE WORLD IS FLAT articularly dictionaries, which constantly need updating.
In 1991, anmohan Singh, then India's finance minister, began opening the ndian economy for foreign investment and introducing competition nto the Indian telecom industry to bring down prices.
To attract more oreign investment, Singh made it much easier for companies to set up atellite downlink stations in Bangalore, so they could skip over the ndian phone system and connect with their home bases in America, urope, or Asia.
Before then, only Texas Instruments had been willing to rave the Indian bureaucracy, becoming the first multinational to estab ish a circuit design and development center in India in 1985.
TI's cen er in Bangalore had its own satellite downlink but had to suffer through aving an Indian government official to oversee itwith the right to ex mine any piece of data going in or out.
Singh loosened all those reins ost-1991.
A short time later, in 1994, HealthScribe India, a company riginally funded in part by Indian-American doctors, was set up in angalore to do outsourced medical transcription for American doctors nd hospitals.
Those doctors at the time were taking handwritten notes nd then dictating them into a Dictaphone for a secretary or someone lse to transcribe, which would usually take days or weeks.
HealthScribe et up a system that turned a doctor's touch-tone phone into a dictation achine.
The doctor would punch in a number and simply dictate his otes to a PC with a voice card in it, which would digitize his voice.
He ould be sitting anywhere when he did it.
Thanks to the satellite, a ousewife or student in Bangalore could go into a computer and down oad that doctor's digitized voice and transcribe itnot in two weeks but n two hours.
Then this person would zip it right back by satellite as a text ile that could be put into the hospital's computer system and become art of the billing file.
Because of the twelve-hour time difference with ndia, Indians could do the transcription while the American, doctors ere sleeping, and the file would be ready and waiting the next morning.
his was an important breakthrough for companies, because if you ould safely, legally, and securely transcribe from Bangalore medical ecords, lab reports, and doctors' diagnosesin one of the most litigious ndustries in the worlda lot of other industries could think about send ng some of their backroom work to be done in India as well.
And they HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD id.
But it remained limited by what could be handled by satellite, where here was a voice delay.
(Ironically, said Gurujot Singh Khalsa, one of the ounders of HealthScribe, they initially explored having Indians in ainethat is, American Indiansdo this work, using some of the fed ral money earmarked for the tribes to get started, but they could never et them interested enough to put the deal together.)
The cost of doing he transcription in India was about one-fifth the cost per line of doing it n the United States, a difference that got a lot of people's attention.
y the late 1990s, though, Lady Luck was starting to shine on India rom two directions: The fiber-optic bubble was starting to inflate, link ng India with the United States, and the Y2K computer crisisthe socalled millennium bugstarted gathering on the horizon.
As you'll emember, the Y2K bug was a result of the fact that when computers ere built, they came with internal clocks.
In order to save memory pace, these clocks rendered dates with just six digitstwo for the day, wo for the month, and, you guessed it, two for the year.
That meant they ould go up to only 12/31/99.
So when the calendar hit January 1, 2000, any older computers were poised to register that not as 01/01/2000 but s 01/01/00, and they would think it was 1900 all over again.
It meant hat a huge number of existing computers (newer ones were being made ith better clocks) needed to have their internal clocks and related sys ems adjusted; otherwise, it was feared, they would shut down, creating a lobal crisis, given how many different management systemsfrom ater to air traffic controlwere computerized.
his computer remediation work was a huge, tedious job.
Who in the orld had enough software engineers to do it all?
Answer: India, with all he techies from all those IITs and private technical colleges and com uter schools.
nd so with Y2K bearing down on us, America and India started dat ng, and that relationship became a huge flattener, because it demon trated to so many different businesses that the combination of the PC, the nternet, and fiber-optic cable had created the possibility of a whole new orm of collaboration and horizontal value creation: outsourcing.
Any ervice, call center, business support operation, or knowledge work that ould be digitized could be sourced globally to the cheapest, smartest, HE WORLD IS FLAT ost efficient provider.
Using fiber-optic-cable-connected workstations, ndian techies could get under the hood of your company's computers nd do all the adjustments, even though they were located halfway round the world.
[Y2K upgrading] was tedious work that was not going to give them n enormous competitive advantage," said Vivek Paul, the Wipro execu ive, whose company did some outsourced Y2K drudge work.
"So all hese Western companies were incredibly challenged to find someone lse who would do it and do it for as little money as possible.
They said, We just want to get past the damn year 2000!'
So they started to work ith Indian [technology] companies who they might not have worked ith otherwise."
o use my parlance, they were ready to go on a blind date with India.
hey were ready to get "fixed up."
Added Jerry Rao, 'Y2K means different hings to different people.
For Indian industry, it represented the biggest pportunity.
India was considered as a place of backward people.
Y2K uddenly required that every single computer in the world needed to be eviewed.
And the sheer number of people needed to review line-by-line ode existed in India.
The Indian IT industry got its footprint across the lobe because of Y2K.
Y2K became our engine of growth, our engine of eing known around the world.
We never looked back after Y2K."
y early 2000, the Y2K work started to wind down, but then a whole ew driver of business emergede-commerce.
The dot-com bubble had ot yet burst, engineering talent was scarce, and demand from dot-coms as enormous.
Said Paul, "People wanted what they felt were missioncritical applications, key to their very existence, to be done, and they ould go nowhere else.
So they turned to the Indian companies, and as hey turned to the Indian companies they found that they were getting de ivery of complex systems, with great quality, sometimes better than what hey were getting from others.
That created an enormous respect for ndian IT providers.
And if [ Y2K work] was the acquaintanceship process, his was the falling-in-love process."
utsourcing from America to India, as a new form of collaboration, xploded.
By just stringing a fiber-optic line from a workstation in HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD angalore to my company's mainframe, I could have Indian IT firms like ipro, Infosys, and Tata Consulting Services managing my e-commerce nd mainframe applications.
Once we're in the mainframe business and once we're in -commercenow we're married," said Paul.
But again, India was lucky hat it could exploit all that undersea fiber-optic cable.
"I had an office ery close to the Leela Palace hotel in Bangalore," Paul added.
"I was orking with a factory located in the information technology park in hitefield, a suburb of Bangalore, and I could not get a local telephone ine between our office and the factory.
Unless you paid a bribe, you could ot get a line, and we wouldn't pay.
So my phone call to Whitefield ould go from my office in Bangalore to Kentucky, where there was a E mainframe computer we were working with, and then from entucky to Whitefield.
We used our own fiber-optic lease line that ran cross the oceanbut the one across town required a bribe."
dia didn't benefit only from the dot-com boom; it benefited even ore from the dot-com bust!
That is the real irony.
The boom laid the able that connected India to the world, and the bust made the cost of us ng it virtually free and also vastly increased the number of American ompanies that would want to use that fiber-optic cable to outsource nowledge work to India.
2K led to this mad rush for Indian brainpower to get the programming ork done.
The Indian companies were good and cheap, but price wasn't irst on customers' mindsgetting the work done was, and India was the nly place with the volume of workers to do it.
Then the dot-com boom omes along right in the wake of Y2K, and India is one of the few places here you can find surplus English-speaking engineers, at any price, be ause all of those in America have been scooped up by e-commerce com anies.
Then the dot-com bubble bursts, the stock market tanks, and the ool of investment capital dries up.
American IT companies that survived he boom and venture capital firms that still wanted to fund start-ups had uch less cash to spend.
Now they needed those Indian engineers not just HE WORLD IS FLAT ecause there were a lot of them, but precisely because they were low-cost.
o the relationship between India and the American business community ntensified another notch.
ne of the great mistakes made by many analysts in the early 2000s as conflating the dot-com boom with globalization, suggesting that oth were just fads and hot air.
When the dot-com bust came along, hese same wrongheaded analysts assumed that globalization was over as ell.
Exactly the opposite was true.
The dot-com bubble was only one as ect of globalization, and when it imploded, rather than imploding glob lization, it actually turbocharged it.
romod Haque, an Indian American and one of the most prominent enture capitalists in Silicon Valley with his firm Norwest Venture artners, was in the middle of this transition.
"When the bust took place,  lot of these Indian engineers in the U.S. [on temporary work visas] got aid off, so they went back to India," explained Haque.
But as a result of he bust, the IT budgets of virtually every major U.S. firm got slashed.
Every IT manager was told to get the same amount of work or more one with less money.
So guess what he does?
He says, 'You remember ijay from India who used to work here during the boom and then went ack home?
Let me call him over in Bangalore and see if he will do the ork for us for less money than what we would pay an engineer here in he U.S.'" And thanks to all that fiber cable laid during the boom, it was asy to find Vijay and put him to work.
he Y2K computer readjustment work was done largely by low-skilled ndian programmers right out of tech schools, said Haque, "but the guys n visas who were coming to America were not trade school guys.
They ere guys with advanced engineering degrees.
So a lot of our companies aw that these guys were good at Java and C++ and architectural design ork for computers, and then they got laid off and went back home, and he IT manager back here who is told, 'I don't care how you get the job one, just get it done for less money,' calls Vijay."
Once America and ndia were dating, the burgeoning Indian IT companies in Bangalore tarted coming up with their own proposals.
The Y2K work had allowed hem to interact with some pretty large companies in the United States, nd as a result they began to understand the pain points and how to do HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD usiness-process implementation and improvement.
So the Indians, who ere doing a lot of very specific custom code maintenance to highervalue-add companies, started to develop their own products and trans orm themselves from maintenance to product companies, offering a ange of software services and consulting.
This took Indian companies uch deeper inside American ones, and business-process outsourcingletting Indians run your back roomwent to a whole new level.
"I have n accounts payable department and I could move this whole thing to ndia under Wipro or Infosys and cut my costs in half," said Haque.
All cross America, CEOs were saying, "'Make it work for less,'" he added.
And the Indian companies were saying, 'I have taken a look under your ood and I will provide you with a total solution for the lowest price.'
" In ther words, the Indian outsourcing companies said, "Do you remember ow I fixed your tires and your pistons during Y2K?
Well, I could actually ive you a whole lube job if you like.
And now that you know me and trust e, you know I can do it."
To their credit, the Indians were not just cheap, hey were also hungry and ready to learn anything.
he scarcity of capital after the dot-com bust made venture capital irms see to it that the companies they were investing in were finding the ost efficient, high-quality, low-price way to innovate.
In the boom times, aid Haque, it was not uncommon for a $50 million investment in a start p to return $500 million once the company went public.
After the bust, hat same company's public offering might bring in only $100 million.
herefore, venture firms wanted to risk only $20 million to get that com any from start-up to IPO.
For venture firms," said Haque, "the big question became, How do I et my entrepreneurs and their new companies to a point where they are reaking even or profitable sooner, so they can stop being a draw on my apital and be sold so our firm can generate good liquidity and returns?
he answer many firms came up with was: I better start outsourcing as any functions as I can from the beginning.
I have to make money for my nvestors faster, so what can be outsourced must be outsourced."
enry Schacht, who was heading Lucent during part of this period, aw the whole process from the side of corporate management.
The busi ess economics, he told me, became "very ugly" for everyone.
Everyone HE WORLD IS FLAT ound prices flat to declining and markets stagnant, yet they were still pending huge amounts of money running the backroom operations of heir companies, which they could no longer afford.
"Cost pressures ere enormous," he recalled, "and the flat world was available, [so] eco omics were forcing people to do things they never thought they would o or could do .
Globalization got supercharged"for both knowl dge work and manufacturing.
Companies found that they could go to IT and find four incredibly smart Chinese engineers who were ready o go back to China and work for them from there for the same amount hat it would cost them to hire one engineer in America.
Bell Labs had a esearch facility at Tsingdao that could connect to Lucent's computers in merica.
"They would use our computers overnight," said Schacht.
Not only was the incremental computing cost close to zero, but so too as the transmission cost, and the computer was idle [at night]."
or all these reasons I believe that Y2K should be a national holiday in ndia, a second Indian Independence Day, in addition to August 15.
As ohns Hopkins foreign policy expert Michael Mandelbaum, who spent art of his youth in India, put it, "Y2K should be called Indian Interde endence Day," because it was India's ability to collaborate with Western ompanies, thanks to the interdependence created byfiber-opticnetworks, hat really vaulted it forward and gave more Indians than ever some real reedom of choice in how, for whom, and where they worked.
o put it another way, August 15 commemorates freedom at midnight.
2K made possible employment at midnightbut not any employment, mployment for India's best knowledge workers.
August 15 gave indepen ence to India.
But Y2K gave independence to Indiansnot all, by any tretch of the imagination, but a lot more thanfiftyyears ago, and many of hem from the most productive segment of the population.
In that sense, es, India was lucky, but it also reaped what it had sowed through hard ork and education and the wisdom of its elders who built all those IITs.
ouis Pasteur said it a long time ago: "Fortune favors the prepared ind."
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD FFSHORING unning with Gazelles, Eating with Lions  December 11, 2001, China formally joined the World Trade ^/Organization, which meant Beijing agreed to follow the same lobal rules governing imports, exports, and foreign investments that most ountries in the world were following.
It meant China was agreeing, in rinciple, to make its own competitive playing field as level as the rest of he world.
A few days later, the American-trained Chinese manager of a uel pump factory in Beijing, which was owned by a friend of mine, Jack erkowski, the chairman and C E O of ASIMCO Technologies, an Ameri an auto parts manufacturer in China, posted the following African roverb, translated into Mandarin, on his factory floor: very morning in Africa, a gazelle wakes up.
t knows it must run faster than the fastest lion or it will be killed.
very morning a lion wakes up.
t knows it must outrun the slowest gazelle or it will starve to death.
t doesn't matter whether you are a lion or a gazelle.
hen the sun comes up, you better start running.
don't know who is the lion and who is the gazelle, but I do know his: Ever since the Chinese joined the W T O , both they and the rest f the world have had to run faster and faster.
This is because China's oining the WTO gave a huge boost to another form of collaboration  ffshoring.
Offshoring, which has been around for decades, is different rom outsourcing.
Outsourcing means taking some specific, but limited, unction that your company was doing in-house such as research, call enters, or accounts receivableand having another company perform hat exact same function for you and then reintegrating their work back nto your overall operation.
Offshoring, by contrast, is when a company akes one of its factories that it is operating in Canton, Ohio, and moves he whole factory offshore to Canton, China.
There, it produces the very HE WORLD IS FLAT ame product in the very same way, only with cheaper labor, lower taxes, ubsidized energy, and lower health-care costs.
Just as Y2K took India and he world to a whole new level of outsourcing, China's joining the WTO ook Beijing and the world to a whole new level of offshoringwith ore companies shifting production offshore and then integrating it into heir global supply chains.
n 1977, Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping put China on the road to cap talism, declaring later that "to get rich is glorious."
When China first pened its tightly closed economy, companies in industrialized countries aw it as an incredible new market for exports.
Every Western or Asian anufacturer dreamed of selling its equivalent of one billion pairs of un erwear to a single market.
Some foreign companies set up shop in China o do just that.
But because China was not subject to world trade rules, it as able to restrict the penetration into its market by these Western com anies through various trade and investment barriers.
And when it was not oing that deliberately, the sheer bureaucratic and cultural difficulties of oing business in China had the same effect.
Many of the pioneer in estors in China lost their shirts and pants and underwearand with hina's Wild West legal system there was not much recourse.
eginning in the 1980s, many investors, particularly overseas Chinese ho knew how to operate in China, started to say, "Well, if we can't sell hat many things to the Chinese right now, why don't we use China's dis iplined labor pool to make things there and sell them abroad?"
This ovetailed with the interests of China's leaders.
China wanted to attract oreign manufacturers and their technologiesnot simply to manufac ure one billion pairs of underwear for sale in China but to use low-wage hinese labor to also sell six billion pairs of underwear to everyone else in he world, and at prices that were a fraction of what the underwear com anies in Europe or America or even Mexico were charging.
nce that offshoring process began in a range of industriesfrom extiles to consumer electronics to furniture to eyeglass frames to auto artsthe only ways other companies could compete was by offshoring o China as well (taking advantage of its low-cost, high-quality platform), r by looking for alternative manufacturing centers in Eastern Europe, he Caribbean, or somewhere else in the developing world.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD y joining the World Trade Organization in 2001, China assured oreign companies that if they shifted factories offshore to China, they ould be protected by international law and standard business prac ices.
This greatly enhanced China's attractiveness as a manufactur ng platform.
Under W T O rules, Beijing agreed with some time for hase-in to treat non-Chinese citizens or firms as if they were Chinese n terms of their economic rights and obligations under Chinese law.
his meant that foreign companies could sell virtually anything any here in China.
W T O membership status also meant that Beijing agreed o treat all W T O member nations equally, meaning that the same tar ffs and the same regulations had to apply equally for everyone.
And it greed to submit itself to international arbitration in the event of a rade dispute with another country or a foreign company.
At the same ime, government bureaucrats became more customer-friendly, proce ures for investments were streamlined, and Web sites proliferated in ifferent ministries to help foreigners navigate China's business regula ions.
I don't know how many Chinese actually ever bought a copy of ao's Little Red Book, but U.S. embassy officials in China told me hat two million copies of the Chinese-language edition of the W T O ule book were sold in the weeks immediately after China signed on to he WTO.
To put it another way, China under Mao was closed and iso ated from the other flattening forces of his day, and as a result Mao was eally a challenge only to his own people.
Deng Xiaoping made China pen to absorbing many of the ten flatteners and, in so doing, made hina a challenge to the whole world.
efore China signed on to the WTO, there was a sense that, while hina had opened up to get the advantages of trade with the West, the overnment and the banks would protect Chinese businesses from any rushing foreign competition, said Jack Perkowski of ASIMCO.
"China's ntry into the W T O was a signal to the community outside of China that t was now on the capitalist track for good," he added.
"Before, you had he thought in the back of your mind that there could be a turning back o state communism.
With WTO, China said, 'We are on one course.'"
ecause China can amass so many low-wage workers at the un killed, semiskilled, and skilled levels, because it has such a voracious HE WORLD IS FLAT ppetite for factory, equipment, and knowledge jobs to keep its people mployed, and because it has such a massive and burgeoning consumer arket, it has become an unparalleled zone for offshoring.
China has ore than 160 cities with a population of one million or more.
You can o to towns on the east coast of China today that you have never heard f and discover that this one town manufactures most of the eyeglass rames in the world, while the town next door manufactures most of the isposable cigarette lighters in the world, and the one next to that is do ng most of the computer screens for Dell, and another is specializing in obile phones.
The Japanese business consultant Kenichi Ohmae esti ates in his book The United States of China that in the Zhu Jiang elta area alone, north of Hong Kong, there are fifty thousand Chinese lectronics component suppliers.
China is a threat, China is a customer, and China is an opportu ity," Ohmae remarked to me one day in Tokyo.
"You have to internal ze China to succeed.
You cannot ignore it."
Instead of competing with hina as an enemy, argues Ohmae, you break down your business and hink about which part of the business you would like to do in China, hich part you would like to sell to China, and which part you want to uy from China.
ere we get to the real flattening aspect of China's opening to the orld market.
The more attractive China makes itself as a base for off horing, the more attractive other developed and developing countries ompeting with it, like Malaysia, Thailand, Ireland, Mexico, Brazil, and ietnam, have to make themselves.
They all look at what is going on in hina and the jobs moving there and say to themselves, "Holy catfish, we ad better start offering these same incentives."
This has created a process f competitive flattening, in which countries scramble to see who can ive companies the best tax breaks, education incentives, and subsidies, n top of their cheap labor, to encourage offshoring to their shores.
hio State University business professor Oded Shenkar, author of he book The Chinese Century, told BusinessWeek (December 6, 2004) hat he gives it to American companies straight: "If you still make any hing labor intensive, get out now rather than bleed to death.
Shaving 5% ere and there won't work."
Chinese producers can make the same ad- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD ustments.
"You need an entirely new business model to compete," he aid.
China's flattening power is also fueled by the fact that it is develop ng a huge domestic market of its own.
The same BusinessWeek article oted that this brings economies of scale, intense local rivalries that keep rices low, an army of engineers that is growing by 350,000 annually, oung workers and managers willing to put in twelve-hour days, an un aralleled component base in electronics and light industry, "and an en repreneurial zeal to do whatever it takes to please big retailers such as al-Mart Stores, Target, Best Buy and J.C.
Penney."
hile visiting Beijing in the fall of 2005, I met with Charles M. artin, president of the American Chamber of Commerce for the eople's Republic of China.
He told me that he had just returned from isiting a sock factory in Zhejiang Province.
This manufacturer produces ocks and ladies' underwear for mass merchandisers around the world, as ell as retailers within China.
The factory owner opened a box of socks or Martin and told him that if you bought a dozen pair of these basic ocks from him, you would pay 1 \$ a pairthe wholesale price.
But the actory owner went on to explain that even at 110 a pair he was becoming uncompetitive"his competitors were selling socks for even less.
So he as planning to relocate his factory four hundred miles inland, into a poor ector of northern Jiangsu Province, where the local government had romised him still lower taxes, lower land costs, and lower labor costs.
ventually, there will be no more inland China for factories to shift nto, and China's manufacturers will not be able to lower their costs any urther by just movingbut we are not there yet, which is why China is uch a leveling force for manufacturing and why cutting your costs by  percent here or there, if you are a Western manufacturer of any basic ommodity item, just won't do it.
You need a whole new business model.
ritics of China's business practices say that its size and economic ower mean that it will soon be setting the global floor not only for low ages but also for lax labor laws and workplace standards.
This is known n the business as "the China price."
ut what is really scary is that China is not attracting so much global in estment by simply racing everyone to the bottom.
That is just a short-term trategy.
The biggest mistake any business can make when it comes to HE WORLD IS FLAT hina is thinking that it is winning only on wages and not improving qual ty and productivity.
In the private, non-state-owned sector of Chinese ndustry, productivity increased 17 percent annuallyI repeat, 17 percent nnuallybetween 1995 and 2002, according to a study by the U.S. onference Board.
This is due to China s absorption of both new tech ologies and modern business practices, starting from a very low base.
ncidentally, the Conference Board study noted, China lost fifteen mil ion manufacturing jobs during this period, compared with two million n the United States.
"As its manufacturing productivity accelerates, hina is losing jobs in manufacturingmany more than the United tates isand gaining them in services, a pattern that has been playing ut in the developed world for many years," the study said.
hina's real long-term strategy is to outrace America and the EU ountries to the top, and the Chinese are off to a good start.
China's lead rs are much more focused than many of their Western counterparts on ow to train their young people in the math, science, and computer skills equired for success in the flat world, how to build a physical and tele om infrastructure that will allow Chinese people to plug and play faster nd easier than others, and how to create incentives that will attract lobal investors.
What China's leaders really want is the next generation f underwear or airplane wings to be designed in China as well.
That is here things are heading in another decade.
So in thirty years we will ave gone from "sold in China" to "made in China" to "designed in hina" to "dreamed up in China" or from China as collaborator with he worldwide manufacturers on nothing to China as a low-cost, highquality, hyperefficient collaborator with worldwide manufacturers on verything.
This should allow China to maintain its role as a major flat ening force, provided that political instability does not disrupt the rocess.
Indeed, while researching this chapter, I came across an online ilicon Valley newsletter called the Inquirer, which follows the semicon uctor industry.
What caught my eye was its November 5, 2001, article eadlined "China to Become Center of Everything."
It quoted a China eople's Daily article that claimed that four hundred out of the Forbes 00 companies have invested in more than two thousand projects in ainland China.
And that was five years ago.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD apan, being right next door to China, has taken a very aggressive ap roach to internalizing the China challenge.
Osamu Watanabe, chair an of the Japan External Trade Organization, Japan's official organ for romoting exports, told me in Tokyo, "China is developing very rapidly nd making the shift from low-grade products to high-grade, high-tech nes."
As a result, added Watanabe, Japanese companies, to remain lobally competitive, have had to shift some production and a lot of as embly of middle-range products to China, while shifting at home to aking "even higher value-added products."
So China and Japan "are ecoming part of the same supply chain."
After a prolonged recession, apan's economy started to bounce back in 2003, due to the sale of thou ands of tons of machinery, assembly robots, and other critical compo ents in China.
In 2003, China replaced the United States as the biggest mporter of Japanese products.
Still, the Japanese government is urging ts companies to be careful not to overinvest in China.
It encourages hem to practice what Watanabe called a "China plus one" strategy: to eep one production leg in China but the other in a different Asian ountryjust in case political turmoil unflattens China one day.
his China flattener has been wrenching for certain manufacturing orkers around the world but a godsend for all consumers.
Fortune maga ine (October 4, 2004) quoted a study by Morgan Stanley estimating that ince the mid-1990s alone, cheap imports from China have saved U.S. con umers roughly $600 billion and have saved U.S. manufacturers untold bil ions in cheaper parts for their products.
This savings, in turn, Fortune oted, has helped the Federal Reserve to hold down interest rates longer, iving more Americans a chance to buy homes or refinance the ones they ave, and giving businesses more capital to invest in new innovations.
n an effort to better understand how offshoring to China works, I sat own in Beijing with Jack Perkowski of ASIMCO, a pioneer in this form f collaboration.
If they ever have a category in the Olympics called "ex reme capitalism," bet on Perkowski to win the gold.
In 1988 he stepped own as a top investment banker at Paine Webber and went to a leverage uyout firm, but two years later, at age forty-two, decided it was time for a ew challenge.
With some partners, he raised $150 million to buy com anies in China and headed off for the adventure of his life.
Since then HE WORLD IS FLAT e has lost and remade millions of dollars, learned every lesson the hard ay, but survived to become a powerful example of what offshoring to hina is all about and what a powerful collaborative tool it can become.
When I first started back in 1992-1993, everyone thought the hard art was to actually find and gain access to opportunities in China," re alled Perkowski.
It turned out that there were opportunities aplenty but a ritical shortage of Chinese managers who understood how to run an auto arts factory along capitalist lines, with an emphasis on exports and mak ng world-class products for the Chinese market.
As Perkowski put it, the asy part was setting up shop in China.
The hard part was getting the right ocal managers who could run the store.
So when he initially started buy ng majority ownership in Chinese auto parts companies, Perkowski began y importing managers from abroad.
Bad idea.
It was too expensive, and perating in China was just too foreign for foreigners.
Scratch plan A.
So we sent all the expats home, which gave me problems with my nvestor base, and went to plan B," he said.
"We then tried to convert the Old China' managers who typically came along with the plants we ought, but that didn't work either.
They were simply too used to work ng in a planned economy where they never had to deal with the mar etplace, just deliver their quotas.
Those managers who did have an ntrepreneurial flair got drunk on their first sip of capitalism and were eady to try anything.
The Chinese are very entrepreneurial," said Perkowski, "but back hen, before China joined the WTO, there was no rule of law and no ond or stock market to restrain this entrepreneurialism.
Your only hoices were managers from the state-owned sector, who were very bu eaucratic, or managers from the first wave of private companies, who ere practicing cowboy capitalism.
Neither is where you want to be.
If our managers are too bureaucratic, you can't get anything donethey ust give excuses about how China is differentand if they are too en repreneurial, you can't sleep at night, because you have no idea what hey are going to do."
Perkowski had a lot of sleepless nights.
ne of his first purchases in China was an interest in a company mak ng rubber parts.
When he subsequently reached an agreement with his hinese partner to purchase his shares in the company, the Chinese part- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD er signed a noncompete clause as part of the transaction.
As soon as the eal closed, however, the Chinese partner went out and opened a new fac ory.
"Noncompete" did not quite translate into Mandarin.
Scratch plan B. eanwhile, Perkowski's partnership was hemorrhaging money erkowski's tuition for learning how to do business in Chinaand he ound himself owning a string of Chinese auto parts factories.
"Around 997 was the low point," he said.
"Our company as a whole was shrink ng and we were not profitable.
While some of our companies were do ng okay, we were generally in tough shape.
Although we had majority wnership and could theoretically put anyone on the field that we anted, I looked at my [managerial] bench and I had no one to put in he game."
Time for plan C. We essentially concluded that, while we liked China, we wanted o part of 'Old China' and instead wanted to place our bets on 'New hina' managers," said Perkowski.
"We began looking for a new breed of hinese managers who were open-minded and had gotten some form of anagement training.
We were looking for individuals who were experi nced at operating in China and yet were familiar with how the rest of  the world operated and knew where China had to go.
So between 1997 nd 1999, we recruited a whole team of 'New China' managers, typically ainland Chinese who had worked for multinationals, and as these anagers came on board, we began one by one to replace the 'Old hina' managers at our companies."
nce the new generation of Chinese managers, who understood lobal markets and customers and could be united around a shared com any visionand knew Chinawas in place, ASIMCO started making  profit.
Today ASIMCO has sales of about $350 million a year in auto arts from thirteen Chinese factories in nine provinces.
The company ells to customers in the United States, and it also has thirty-six sales of ices throughout China servicing automakers in that country too.
rom this base, Perkowski made his next big movetaking the profits rom offshoring back onshore in America.
"In April of 2003, we bought he North American camshaft operations of Federal-Mogul Corporation, n old-line components company that is now in bankruptcy," said erkowski.
"We bought the business first to get access to its customers, HE WORLD IS FLAT hich were primarily the Big Three automakers, plus Caterpillar and ummins.
While we have had long-standing relationships with Cat and umminsand this acquisition enhanced our position with themthe amshaft sales to the Big Three were ourfirst.The second reason to make he acquisition was to obtain technology which we could bring back to hina.
Like most of the technology that goes into modern passenger cars nd trucks, people take camshaft technology for granted.
However, amshafts [that part of the motor that controls the intake and exhaust alves] are highly engineered products which are critical to the perfor ance of the engine.
The acquisition of this business essentially gave us he know-how and technology that we could use to become the camshaft eader in China.
As a result, we now have the best camshaft technology nd a customer base both in China and the U.S." his is a very important point, because the general impression is that ffshoring is a lose-lose proposition for American workerssomething hat was here went over there, and that is the end of the story.
The reality s more complicated.
ost companies build offshore factories not simply to obtain cheaper abor for products they want to sell in America or Europe.
Another moti ation is to serve that foreign market without having to worry about trade arriers and to gain a dominant foothold thereparticularly a giant mar et like China's.
According to the U.S. Commerce Department, nearly 0 percent of the output from U.S.-owned offshore factories is sold to for ign consumers.
But this actually stimulates American exports.
There are  variety of studies indicating that every dollar a company invests overseas n an offshore factory yields additional exports for its home country, be ause roughly one-third of global trade today is within multinational ompanies.
It works the other way as well.
Even when production is oved offshore to save on wages, it is usually not all moved offshore.
ccording to a January 26, 2004, study by the Heritage Foundation, Job reation and the Taxation of Foreign-Source Income, American compa ies that produce at home and abroad, for both the American market nd China's, generate more than 21 percent of U.S. economic output, roduce 56 percent of U.S. exports, and employ three-fifths of all manu- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD acturing employees, about nine million workers.
So if General Motors uilds a factory offshore in Shanghai, it also ends up creating jobs in merica by exporting a lot of goods and services to its own factory in hina and benefiting from lower parts costs in China for its factories n America.
Finally, America is a beneficiary of the same phenomenon.
hile much attention is paid to American companies going offshore to hina, little attention is paid to the huge amount of offshore investment oming into America every year, because foreigners want access to merican markets and labor just like we want access to theirs.
On eptember 25, 2003, DaimlerChrysler celebrated the tenth anniversary f its decision to build the first Mercedes-Benz passenger car factory out ide Germany, in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, by announcing a $600 million lant expansion.
"In Tuscaloosa we have impressively shown that we can roduce a new production series with a new workforce in a new factory, nd we have also demonstrated that it is possible to have vehicles suc essfully 'Made by Mercedes' outside of Germany," Professor Jiirgen ubbert, the DaimlerChrysler Board of Management member respon ible for the Mercedes Car Group, announced on the anniversary.
ot surprisingly, ASIMCO will use its new camshaft operation in hina to handle the raw material and rough machining operations, ex orting semifinished products to its camshaft plant in America, where ore skilled American workers can do the finished machining opera ions, which are most critical to quality.
In this way, ASIMCO's American ustomers receive the benefit of a China supply chain and at the same ime have the comfort of dealing with a known, American supplier.
he average wage of a high-skilled machinist in America is $3,000 to 4,000 a month.
The average wage for a factory worker in China is about 150 a month.
In addition, ASIMCO is required to participate in a hinese government-sponsored pension plan covering health care, ousing, and retirement benefits.
Between 35 and 45 percent of a hinese worker's monthly wage goes directly to the local labor bureau to over these benefits.
The fact that health insurance in China is so much heaperbecause of lower wages, much more limited health service of erings, and no malpractice suits "certainly makes China an attractive HE WORLD IS FLAT lace to expand and add employees/' explained Perkowski.
"Anything hich can be done to reduce a U.S. company's liability for medical cov rage would be a plus in keeping jobs in the U.S." y taking advantage of the flat world to collaborate this way etween onshore and offshore factories, and between high-wage, highskilled American workers close to their market and low-wage Chinese orkers close to theirssaid Perkowski, "we make our American com any more competitive, so it is getting more orders and we are actually rowing the business.
And that is what many in the U.S. are missing hen they talk about offshoring.
Since the acquisition, for example, we ave doubled our business with Cummins, and our business with Cater illar has grown significantly.
All of our customers are exposed to global ompetition and really need their supply base to do the right thing as far s cost competitiveness.
They want to work with suppliers who under tand the flat world.
When I went to visit our U.S. customers to explain ur strategy for the camshaft business, they were very positive about what e were doing, because they could see that we were aligning our busi ess in a way that was going to enable them to be more competitive."
his degree of collaboration has been possible only in the last couple f years.
"We could not have done what we have done in China in 1983 r 1993," said Perkowski.
"Since 1993, a number of things have come to ether.
For example, people always talk about how much the Internet as benefited the U.S.
The point I always make is that China has bene ited even more.
What has held China back in the past was the inability f people outside China to get information about the country, and the in bility of people inside China to get information about the rest of the orld.
Prior to the Internet, the only way to close that information gap as travel.
Now you can stay home and do it with the Internet.
You could ot operate our global supply chain without it.
We now just e-mail blue rints over the Internetwe don't even need FedEx."
he advantages for manufacturing in China, for certain industries, re becoming overwhelming, added Perkowski, and cannot be ignored.
ither you get flat or you'll be flattened by China.
"If you are sitting in he U.S. and don't figure out how to get into China," he said, "in ten or ifteen years from now you will not be a global leader."
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD w that China is in the WTO, a lot of traditional, slow, inefficient,  >l and protected sectors of the Chinese economy are being exposed to ome withering global competitionsomething received as warmly in anton, China, as in Canton, Ohio.
Had the Chinese government put TO membership to a popular vote, "it never would have passed," said at Powers, who headed the U.S.-China Business Council office in eijing during the W T O accession.
A key reason why China's leadership ought W T O membership was to use it as a club to force China's bu eaucracy to modernize and take down internal regulatory walls and ockets for arbitrary decision making.
China's leadership "knew that hina had to integrate globally and that many of their existing institu ions would simply not change and reform, and so they used the W T O s leverage against their own bureaucracy.
And for the last two and a half ears they've been slugging it out."
ver time, adherence to W T O standards will make China's economy ven flatter and more of a flattener globally.
But this transition will not be asy, and the chances of a political or economic crackup that disrupts or lows this process are not insignificant.
But even if China implements all he WTO reforms, it won't be able to rest.
It will soon be reaching a point here its ambitions for economic growth will require more political re orm.
China will never root out corruption without a free press and active ivil society institutions.
It can never really become efficient without a ore codified rule of law.
It will never be able to deal with the inevitable ownturns in its economy without a more open political system that allows eople to vent their grievances.
To put it another way, China will never be ruly flat until it gets over that huge speed bump called "political reform."
t seems to be heading in that direction, but it still has a long way to o. I like the way a U.S. diplomat in China put it to me in the spring of 004: "China right now is doing titillation, not privatization.
Reform ere is translucentand sometimes it is quite titillating, because you an see the shapes moving behind the screenbut it is not transparent.
The government still just gives] the information [about the economy] to  few companies and designated interest groups."
Why only translucent?
HE WORLD IS FLAT  asked.
He answered, "Because if you are fully transparent, what do you o with the feedback?
They don't know how to deal with that question.
hey cannot deal [yet] with the results of transparency."
f and when China gets over that political bump in the road, I think t could become not only a bigger platform for offshoring but another ree-market version of the United States.
While that may seem threaten ng to some, I think it would be an incredibly positive development for he world.
Think about how many new products, ideas, jobs, and con umers arose from Western Europe's and Japan's efforts to become freemarket democracies after World War II.
The process unleashed an nprecedented period of global prosperityand the world wasn't even lat then.
It had a wall in the middle.
If India and China move in that di ection, the world will not only become flatter than ever but also, I am onvinced, more prosperous than ever.
Three United States are better han one, and five would be better than three.
ut even as a free-trader, I am worried about the challenge this will ose to wages and benefits of certain workers in the United States, at least n the short run.
It is too late for protectionism when it comes to China.
ts economy is totally interlinked with those of the developed world, and rying to delink it would cause economic and geopolitical chaos that ould devastate the global economy.
Americans and Europeans will ave to develop new business models that will enable them to get the est out of China and cushion themselves against some of the worst.
As usinessWeek, in its dramatic December 6, 2004, cover story on "The hina Price," put it, "Can China dominate everything?
Of course not.
merica remains the world's biggest manufacturer, producing 75% of hat it consumes, though that's down from 90% in the mid-'90s.
Indus ries requiring huge R&D budgets and capital investment, such as aero pace, pharmaceuticals, and cars, still have strong bases in the U.S. .
merica will surely continue to benefit from China's expansion."
That aid, unless America can deal with the long-term industrial challenge osed by the China price in so many areas, "it will suffer a loss of eco omic power and influence."
r, to put it another way, if Americans and Europeans want to bene it from the flattening of the world and the interconnecting of all the HE EN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD arkets and knowledge centers, they will all have to run at least as fast as he fastest lionand I suspect that lion will be China, and I suspect that ill be pretty darn fast.
'l.ATTKNMR / UPPLY-CHAINING ating Sushi in Arkansas  ad never seen what a supply chain looked like in action until I visited al-Mart headquarters in Bentonville, Arkansas.
My Wal-Mart hosts ook me over to the 1.2-million-square-foot distribution center, where we limbed up to a viewing perch and watched the show.
On one side of the uilding, scores of white Wal-Mart trailer trucks were dropping off boxes f merchandise from thousands of different suppliers.
Boxes large and mall were fed up a conveyor belt at each loading dock.
These little con eyor belts fed into a bigger belt, like streams feeding into a powerful iver.
Twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, the suppliers' trucks eed the twelve miles of conveyor streams, and the conveyor streams feed nto a huge Wal-Mart river of boxed products.
But that is just half the how.
As the Wal-Mart river flows along, an electric eye reads the bar odes on each box on its way to the other side of the building.
There, the iver parts again into a hundred streams.
Electric arms from each stream each out and guide the boxes ordered by particular Wal-Mart stores  ff the main river and down its stream, where another conveyor belt weeps them into a waiting Wal-Mart truck, which will rush these par icular products onto the shelves of a particular Wal-Mart store some here in the country.
There, a consumer will lift one of these products ff the shelf, and the cashier will scan it in, and the moment that hap ens, a signal will be generated.
That signal will go out across the WalMart network to the supplier of that productwhether that supplier's actory is in coastal China or coastal Maine.
That signal will pop up on he supplier's computer screen and prompt him to make another of that tem and ship it via the Wal-Mart supply chain, and the whole cycle will HE WORLD IS FLAT tart anew.
So no sooner does your arm lift a product off the local WalMart's shelf and onto the checkout counter than another mechanical rm starts making another one somewhere in the world.
Call it "the WalMart Symphony" in multiple movementswith no finale.
It just plays ver and over 24/7/365: delivery, sorting, packing, distribution, buying, anufacturing, reordering, delivery, sorting, packing .
ust one company, Hewlett-Packard, will sell four hundred thousand omputers through the four thousand Wal-Mart stores worldwide in one ay during the Christmas season, which will require HP to adjust its upply chain, to make sure that all of its standards interface with WalMart's, so that these computers flow smoothly into the Wal-Mart river, nto the Wal-Mart streams, into the Wal-Mart stores.
al-Mart's ability to bring off this symphony on a global scale oving 2.3 billion general merchandise cartons a year down its supply hain into its storeshas made it the most important example of the ext great flattener I want to discuss, which I call supply-chaining.
upply-chaining is a method of collaborating horizontallyamong sup liers, retailers, and customersto create value.
Supply-chaining is both nabled by the flattening of the world and a hugely important flattener tself, because the more these supply chains grow and proliferate, the ore they force the adoption of common standards between companies so that every link of every supply chain can interface with the next), the ore they eliminate points of friction at borders, the more the efficien ies of one company get adopted by the others, and the more they en ourage global collaboration.
o appreciate how important supply-chaining has become as a source f competitive advantage and profit in a flat world, think about this one act: Wal-Mart today is the biggest retail company in the world, and it does ot make a single thing.
All it "makes" is a hyperefficient supply chain.
As ossi Sheffi, an expert on supply-chain management and a professor of ngineering systems at MIT, likes to say, "Making stuffthat's easy.
upply chain, now that is really hard."
What he means is that with to ay's technology it is difficult to keep intellectual property secret and hus easy to reverse-engineer any product and "make stuff" in a matter of ays.
However, building a process that "delivers stuff" across the globe  HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD nvolving dozens of suppliers, distributors, port operators, customs bro ers, forwarders, and carriers in a finely tuned chain operating in con ertis not only difficult, it's very, very hard to duplicate.
efore looking at Wal-Mart in detail, let me make a few general oints about supply chains and why they have become so important.
hen the world is flat, your company both can and must take advantage f the best producers at the lowest prices anywhere they can be found.
If ou don't, your competitors will.
So global supply chainsthat draw arts and products from every corner of the worldhave become essen ial for both retailers and manufacturers.
That is the good news.
The bad ews, as Sheffi suggests, is that making these chains work is much harder han it looks and requires constant innovation and constant adjustment.
here are two basic challenges in developing a global supply chain in a lat world, he explains.
One is "global optimization."
What that means is hat it doesn't matter if you can get one part cheaper in one place.
The ey is that the total cost of delivering all your parts on time from all four orners of the globe to your factories or retail outlets has to be low, and ertainly lower than those of your competitors.
"If I am the transporta ion manager in a company, I want to do business with the cheapest rucking company," said Sheffi.
"If I am the production manager in that ompany, I want to do business with the most reliable trucking company.
nd they may not be the same."
So the first challenge is balancing out all hese factors to get the most reliable, low-cost delivery system in place.
he second major challenge, said Sheffi, is coordinating disruptionprone supply with hard-to-predict demand.
That is, you don't want to buy oo many of one part, or one sweaterbecause then you will have to dis ount them when they pile up on the shelves of your factory or store.
But ou don't want to buy too few of that part or those sweaters, either, be ause customers might not find what they want when they go shopping, nd you may lose not only a sale that day but a customer for life.
Both hallenges are exacerbated by the short life cycle of products today, par icularly fashion and consumer electronics products.
Innovation is hap ening much faster, and so products go in and out of fashion much faster, hich makes forecasting demand much more difficult.
here are many ways that companies try to meet these challenges, HE WORLD IS FLAT oted Sheffi.
One is by replacing inventory with information.
This is an rea that Wal-Mart pioneered.
The faster you can get information from tores about what customers are buyingwhat products, what models, nd what colorsthe faster you can get that information to your manu acturers and designers and the faster they can send back down the supply hain more red sweaters and fewer yellow ones.
Advanced information echnology also gives Wal-Mart "visibility" into where products are at any ime as they move through the supply chain.
Thus, if demand is high in exas and lower than expected in New England, Wal-Mart can redirect he flow midstream in order to ensure that products are routed to Texas, here customers want them.
The Spanish fashion retailer Zara is partic larly adept at this and regularly outperforms its competition.
Zara lives y the motto that it is more profitable to incur shortages than overstock, nd then to respond to shortages with lightning speed so you are offering ustomers exactly what they want with much less risk of leftovers.
How o they do this?
ara spends heavily on sophisticated information technology, "in luding PDA's with transmission capabilities for all store managers to onitor customer preferences and then send data directly to a central lanning office," according to Longitudes 04, a collaborative study by arvard Business School and UPS.
"This technology has so reduced ex cution time that it can get a new product from design to store shelves in o more than 30 days, allowing Zara to postpone design decisions to in orporate up-to-the-minute results from its stores.
By planning well to andle the day-to-day risk of fickle consumer tastes and rapidly changing tyle preferences, Zara is also prepared to adapt when unforeseen events ccur.
Immediately after September 11, Zara executives realized that onsumers were in a somber mood, and within just a few weeks [Zara ex cutives] had stocked their stores with new merchandise that was pre ominantly black."
his strategy is known in the business as "postponement," and the idea, xplained Sheffi, whose latest work is The Resilient Enterprise: Over oming Vulnerability for Competitive Advantage, is that as it becomes arder and harder to forecast demand, good companies find ways to post one adding value to their products until the last possible moment.
This HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD s the genius of Dell.
Because Dell has a customer for every computer be ore it is manufactured, Dell makes exactly the number of computers hat customers want, each one exactly the way the customer wants it.
It as no inventory of computers.
It has a basic supply of parts and then dds value by tailoring screen size, memory, and software to the desires f each customer.
"Dell can get stuck with parts that it bought on spec, ut each part can be used in many configurations so it is likely to be used ooner or later," said Sheffi.
"Dell can never get stuck, however, with omputers that don't get bought."
The bottom line, concluded Sheffi, is hat in a flat world, products are turned from innovations into commodi ies faster than ever, competition is coming from all over the globe and is ore intense than ever, and consumer demand is more volatile and in ormed than ever, with fads moving in and out around the globe like ightning bolts.
In this world, a smart and fast global supply chain is be oming one of the most important ways for a company to distinguish it elf from its competitors.
consumers, we love supply chains, because they deliver us all sorts f goodsfrom tennis shoes to laptop computersat lower and ower prices and tailored more and more precisely to just what we want.
hat is how Wal-Mart became the world's biggest retailer.
But as workers, e are sometimes ambivalent or hostile to these supply chains, because hey expose us to higher and higher pressures to compete, and force our ompanies to cut costs, and also, at times, cut our wages and benefits.
That s how Wal-Mart became one of the world's most controversial companies.
o retail company has been more efficient at improving its supply chain and thereby flattening the world) than Wal-Mart, and no company epito izes the tension that supply chains evoke between the consumer in us nd the worker in us than does Wal-Mart.
A September 30, 2002, article n Computerworld summed up Wal-Mart's pivotal role: "'Being a supplier o Wal-Mart is a two-edged sword,' says Joseph F. Eckroth Jr., CIO at attel Inc. 'They're a phenomenal channel but a tough customer.
They emand excellence.'
It's a lesson that the El Segundo, Calif-based toy anufacturer and thousands of other suppliers learned as the world's HE WORLD IS FLAT argest retailer, Wal-Mart Stores Inc., built an inventory and supply chain anagement system that changed the face of business.
By investing early nd heavily in cutting-edge technology to identify and track sales on the ndividual item level, the Bentonville, Ark.-based retail giant made its IT nfrastructure a key competitive advantage that has been studied and opied by companies around the world.
'We view Wal-Mart as the best upply chain operator of all time/ says Pete Abell, retail research director t high-tech consultancy AMR Research Inc. in Boston."
n pursuit of the world's most efficient supply chain, Wal-Mart has iled up a list of business offenses over the years that has given the com any several deserved black eyes and that it is belatedly starting to address n a meaningful way.
But its role as one of the ten forces that flattened the orld is undeniable, and it was to get a handle on this that I decided to ake my own pilgrimage to Bentonville.
I don't know why, but on the light in from La Guardia, I was thinking, Boy, I would really like some ushi tonight.
But where am I going to find sushi in northwest Arkansas?
nd even if I found it, would I want to eat it?
Could you really trust the el in Arkansas?
hen I arrived at the Hilton near Wal-Mart's headquarters, I was tunned to see, like a mirage, a huge Japanese steak house-sushi restau ant right next door.
When I remarked to the desk clerk who was check ng me in that I never expected to get my sushi fix in Bentonville, he told e, "We've got three more Japanese restaurants opening up soon."
ultiple Japanese restaurants in Bentonville?
he demand for sushi in Arkansas is not an accident.
It has to do with he fact that all around Wal-Mart's offices, vendors have set up their own perations to be close to the mother ship.
Indeed, the area is known as Vendorville."
The amazing thing about Wal-Mart's headquarters is that t is so, well, Wal-Mart.
The corporate offices are crammed into a recon igured warehouse.
As we passed a large building made of corrugated etal, I figured it was the maintenance shed.
"Those are our interna ional offices," said my host, spokesman William Wertz.
The corporate uites are housed in offices that are one notch below those of the princi al, vice principal, and head counselor at my daughter's public junior igh schoolbefore it was remodeled.
When you pass through the lobby, HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD ou see these little cubicles where potential suppliers are pitching their roducts to Wal-Mart buyers.
One has sewing machines all over the able, another has dolls, another has women's shirts.
It feels like a cross etween Sam's Club and the covered bazaar of Damascus.
Attention al-Mart shareholders: The company is definitely not wasting your money n frills.
t how did so much innovative thinkingthinking that has re haped the world's business landscape in many wayscome out of uch a Li'l Abner backwater?
It is actually a classic example of a phe omenon I point to often in this book: the coefficient of flatness.
The ewer natural resources your country or company has, the more you will ig inside yourself for innovations in order to survive.
Wal-Mart became he biggest retailer in the world because it drove a hard bargain with veryone it came in contact with.
But make no mistake about one thing: al-Mart also became number one because this little hick company rom northwest Arkansas was smarter and faster about adopting new echnology than any of its competitors.
And it still is.
avid Glass, the company's C E O from 1988 to 2000, oversaw many f the innovations that made Wal-Mart the biggest and most profitable etailer on the planet.
Fortune magazine once dubbed him "the most nderrated C E O ever" for the quiet way he built on Sam Walton's vision.
avid Glass is to supply-chaining what Bill Gates is to word processing.
hen Wal-Mart was just getting started in northern Arkansas in the 960s, explained Glass, it wanted to be a discounter.
But in those days, veryfive-and-dimegot its goods from the same wholesalers, so there was o way to get an edge on your competitors.
The only way Wal-Mart could ee to get an edge, he said, was for it to buy its goods in volume directly rom the manufacturers.
But it wasn't efficient for manufacturers to ship to ultiple Wal-Mart stores spread all over, so Wal-Mart set up a distribution enter to which all the manufacturers could ship their merchandise, and hen Wal-Mart got its own trucks to distribute these goods itself to its tores.
The math worked like this: It cost roughly 3 percent more on aver ge for Wal-Mart to maintain its own distribution center.
But it turned HE WORLD IS FLAT ut, said Glass, that cutting out the wholesalers and buying direct from he manufacturers saved on average 5 percent, so that allowed Wal-Mart o cut costs on average 2 percent and then make it up on volume.
nce it established that basic method of buying directly from manu acturers to get the deepest discounts possible, Wal-Mart focused relent essly on three things.
The first was working with the manufacturers to et them to cut their costs as much as possible.
The second was working n its supply chain from those manufacturers, wherever they were in the orld, to Wal-Mart's distribution centers, to make it as low-cost and frictionless as possible.
The third was constantly improving Wal-Mart's in ormation systems, so it knew exactly what its customers were buying and ould feed that information to all the manufacturers, so the shelves ould always be stocked with the right items at the right time.
al-Mart quickly realized that if it could save money by buying di ectly from the manufacturers, by constantly innovating to cut the cost of unning its supply chain, and by keeping its inventories low by learning ore about its customers, it could beat its competitors on price every ime.
Sitting in Bentonville, Arkansas, it didn't have much choice.
The reason we built all our own logistics and systems is because we re in the middle of nowhere," said Jay Allen, Wal-Mart's senior vice resident of corporate affairs.
"It really was a small town.
If you wanted to o to a third party for logistics, it was impossible.
It was pure survival.
ow with all the attention we are getting there is an assumption that our ow prices derive from our size or because we're getting stuff from China r being able to dictate to suppliers.
The fact is the low prices are derived rom efficiencies Wal-Mart has invested inthe system and the culture.
t is a very low-cost culture."
Added Glass, "I wish that I could say we ere brilliant and visionary, [but] it was all born out of necessity."
he more that supply chain grew, the more Walton and Glass un erstood that scale and efficiency were the keys to their whole business.
ut simply, the more scale and scope their supply chain had, the more hings they sold for less to more customers, the more leverage they had ith suppliers to drive prices down even more, the more they sold to ore customers, the more scale and scope their supply chain had, the ore profit they reaped for their shareholders.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD am Walton was the father of that culture, but necessity was its other, and its offspring has turned out to be a lean, mean supply-chain achine.
In 2004, Wal-Mart purchased roughly $260 billion worth of erchandise and ran it through a supply chain consisting of 108 distribu ion centers around the United States, serving the some three thousand al-Mart stores in America.
n the early years, "we were smallwe were 4 or 5 percent of Sears nd Kmart," said Glass.
"If you are that small, you are vulnerable, so what e wanted to do more than anything else was grow market share.
We had o undersell others.
If I could reduce from 3 percent to 2 percent the cost f running my distribution centers, I could reduce retail prices and grow y market share and then not be vulnerable to anyone.
So any efficiency e generated we passed on to the consumer."
or instance, after the manufacturers dropped off their goods at the al-Mart distribution center, Wal-Mart needed to deliver those goods in mall bunches to each of its stores.
It meant that Wal-Mart had trucks go ng all over America.
Walton quickly realized if he connected his drivers y radios and satellites, after they dropped off at a certain Wal-Mart store, hey could go a few miles down the road and pick up goods from a man facturer so they wouldn't come back empty and so Wal-Mart could save he delivery charges from that manufacturer.
A few pennies here, a few ennies there, and the result is more volume, scope, and scale.
n improving its supply chain, Wal-Mart leaves no link untouched.
hile I was touring the Wal-Mart distribution center in Bentonville, I oticed that some boxes were too big to go on the conveyor belts and ere being moved around on pallets by Wal-Mart employees driving spe ial minilift trucks with headphones on.
A computer tracks how many allets each employee is plucking every hour to put onto trucks for dif erent stores, and a computerized voice tells each of them whether he is head of schedule or behind schedule.
"You can choose whether you ant your computer voice to be a man or a woman, and you can choose nglish or Spanish," explained Rollin Ford, Wal-Mart's executive vice resident, who oversees the supply chain and was giving me my tour.
few years ago, these pallet drivers would get written instructions for here to pluck a certain pallet and what truck to take it to, but Wal-Mart HE WORLD IS FLAT iscovered that by giving them headphones with a soothing computer oice to instruct them, drivers could use both hands and not have to carry ieces of paper.
And by having the voice constantly reminding them hether they were behind or ahead of expectations, "we got a boost in roductivity," said Ford.
It is a million tiny operational innovations like his that differentiate Wal-Mart's supply chain.
ut the real breakthrough, said Glass, was when Wal-Mart realized hat while it had to be a tough bargainer with its manufacturers on price, t the same time the two had to collaborate to create value for each other orizontally if Wal-Mart was going to keep driving down costs.
Wal-Mart as one of the first companies to introduce computers to track store sales nd inventory and was the first to develop a computerized network in or er to share this information with suppliers.
Wal-Mart's theory was that he more information everyone had about what customers were pulling ff the shelves, the more efficient Wal-Mart's buying would be, the uicker its suppliers could adapt to changing market demand.
n 1983, Wal-Mart invested in point-of-sale terminals, which simulta eously rang up sales and tracked inventory deductions for rapid resupply.
Four years later, it installed a large-scale satellite system linking all of he stores to company headquarters, giving Wal-Mart's central computer ystem real-time inventory data and paving the way for a supply chain reased by information and humming down to the last atom of effi iency.
A major supplier can now tap into Wal-Mart's Retail Link private xtranet system to see exactly how its products are selling and when it ight need to up its production.
'Opening its sales and inventory databases to suppliers is what made al-Mart the powerhouse it is today,' Rena Granofsky, a senior partner at .
C. Williams Group Ltd., a Toronto-based retail consulting firm," said n the 2002 Computerworld article on Wal-Mart. "
'While its competi ion guarded sales information, Wal-Mart approached its suppliers as if hey were partners, not adversaries,' " says Granofsky.
By implementing a ollaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment (CPFR) pro ram, Wal-Mart began a just-in-time inventory program that reduced arrying costs for both the retailer and its suppliers.
'There's a lot less ex ess inventory in the supply chain because of it,' Granofsky says."
Thanks HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD o the efficiency of its supply chain alone, Wal-Mart's cost of goods is es imated to be 5 to 10 percent less than that of most of its competitors.
ow Wal-Mart, in its latest supply-chain innovation, has introduced FIDradio frequency identification microchips, attached to each pallet nd merchandise box that comes into Wal-Mart, to replace bar codes, hich have to be scanned individually and can get ripped or soiled.
In June 003, Wal-Mart informed its top one hundred suppliers that by January 1, 005, all pallets and boxes that they ship to Wal-Mart distribution centers ave to come equipped with RFID tags.
(According to the RFID Journal, RFID is a generic term for technologies that use radio waves to automati ally identify people or objects.
There are several methods of identification, ut the most common is to store a serial number that identifies a person or bject, and perhaps other information, on a microchip that is attached to an ntennathe chip and the antenna together are called an RFID transpon er or an RFID tag.
The antenna enables the chip to transmit the identifi ation information to a reader.
The reader converts the radio waves eflected back from the RFID tag into digital information that can then be assed on to computers that can make use of it.")
RFID will allow Wal-Mart o track any pallet or box at each stage in its supply chain and know exactly hat product from which manufacturer is inside, with what expiration date.
f a grocery item has to be stored at a certain temperature, the RFID tag will ell Wal-Mart when the temperature is too high or too low.
Because each of hese tags costs around 200, Wal-Mart is reserving them now for big boxes nd pallets, not individual items.
This is clearly the wave of the future.
FID technology and sophisticated order analysis tools that monitor even he most minute market activity are rapidly leading us toward industry's holy railabsolute balance in supply and demand.
When you have RFID," said Rollin Ford, the Wal-Mart logistics vice resident, "you have more insights."
You can tell even faster which stores ell more of which shampoo on Fridays and which ones on Sundays, and hether Hispanics prefer to shop more on Saturday nights rather than ondays in the stores in their neighborhoods.
"When all this information s fed into our demand models, we can become more efficient on when we roduce [a product] and when we ship it and then put it on the trucks in xactly the right place inside the trucks so it can flow more efficiently," HE WORLD IS FLAT dded Ford.
"We used to have to count each piece, and scanning it at [the eceiving end] was a bottleneck.
Now [with RFID], we just scan the whole allet under a bubble, and it says you have all thirty items you ordered and ach box tells you, This is what I am and this is how I am feeling, this is hat color I am, and am I in good shape'so it makes receiving hugely asier."
Procter & Gamble spokesperson Jeannie Tharrington talked to alon.com (September 20, 2004) about Wal-Mart's move to RFID: "We ee this as beneficial to the entire supply chain.
Right now our out-of-stock evels are higher than we'd like and certainly higher than the consumer ould like, and we think this technology can help us to keep the products n the shelf more often."
RFID will also allow for quicker remixing of the upply chain in response to events.
uring hurricanes, Wal-Mart officials told me, Wal-Mart knows that eople eat more things like Pop-Tartseasy-to-store, nonperishable temsand that their stores also sell a lot of kids' games that don't require lectricity and can substitute for TV.
It also knows that when hurricanes re coming, people tend to drink more beer.
So the minute Wal-Mart's eteorologists tell headquarters a hurricane is bearing down on Florida, ts supply chain automatically adjusts to a hurricane mix in the Florida toresmore beer early, more Pop-Tarts later.
al-Mart is constantly looking for new ways to collaborate with its ustomers.
Lately, it has gone into banking.
It found that in areas with arge Hispanic populations, many people had no affiliation with a bank nd were getting ripped off by check-cashing outlets.
So Wal-Mart of ered them payroll check cashing, money orders, money transfers, and ven bill payment services for standard items like electricity bills all for ery small fees.
Wal-Mart had an internal capability to do that for its own mployees and simply turned it into an external business.
OO UCH F  GOOD HING nfortunately for Wal-Mart, the same factors that drove its instinct for onstant innovation its isolation from the world, its need to dig inside it elf, and its need to connect remote locations to a global supply chain  HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD lso got it in trouble.
It is hard to exaggerate how isolated Bentonville, rkansas, is from the currents of global debate on labor and human ights, and it is easy to see how this insular company, obsessed with low ring prices, could have gone over the edge in some of its practices.
am Walton bred not only a kind of ruthless quest for efficiency in mproving Wal-Mart's supply chain but also a degree of ruthlessness pe iod.
I am talking about everything from Wal-Mart's recently exposed ractice of locking overnight workers into its stores, to its allowing WalMart's maintenance contractors to use illegal immigrants as janitors, to ts role as defendant in the largest civil-rights class-action lawsuit in his ory, to its refusal to stock certain magazines like Playboyon its helves, even in small towns where Wal-Mart is the only major store.
his is all aside from the fact that some of Wal-Mart's biggest competitors omplain that they have had to cut health-care benefits and create a ower wage tier to compete with Wal-Mart, which pays less and covers ess than most big companies (more on this later).
One can only hope hat all the bad publicity Wal-Mart has received in the last few years will orce it to understand that there is a fine line between a hyperefficient lobal supply chain that is helping people save money and improve their ives and one that has pursued cost cutting and profit margins to such a egree that whatever social benefits it is offering with one hand, it is tak ng away with the other.
al-Mart is the China of companies.
It has so much leverage that it an grind down any supplier to the last halfpenny.
And it is not at all hes tant about using its ability to play its foreign and domestic suppliers off gainst one another.
ome suppliers have found ways to flourish under the pressure and be ome better at what they do.
If all of Wal-Mart's suppliers were being queezed dry by Wal-Mart, Wal-Mart would have no suppliers.
So obvi usly many of them are thriving as Wal-Mart's partners.
But some no doubt ave translated Wal-Mart's incessant price pressure into lower wages and enefits for their employees or watched as their business moved to China, hence Wal-Mart's supply chain pulled in $18 billion worth of goods in 004 from five thousand Chinese suppliers.
"If Wal-Mart were an indi idual economy, it would rank as China's eighth-biggest trading partner, HE WORLD IS FLAT head of Russia, Australia and Canada," Xu Jun, the spokesman for WalMart China, told the China Business Weekly (November 29, 2004).
he successor generation to Sam Walton's leadership seems to rec gnize that it has both an image and a reality to fix.
How far Wal-Mart ill adjust remains to be seen.
But when I asked Wal-Mart's CEO, H. Lee cott Jr., directly about all these issues, he did not duck.
In fact, he anted to talk about it.
"What I think I have to do is institutionalize this ense of obligation to society to the same extent that we have institution lized the commitment to the customer," said Scott.
"The world has hanged and we have missed that.
We believed that good intentions and ood stores and good prices would cause people to forgive what we are ot as good at, and we were wrong."
In certain areas, he added, "we are ot as good as we should be.
We just have to get better."
ne trend that Wal-Mart insists it is not responsible for is the off horing of manufacturing.
"We are much better off if we can buy mer handise made in the United States," said Glass.
"I spent two years going round this country trying to talk people into manufacturing here.
We ould pay more to buy it here because the manufacturing facilities in hose towns [would create jobs for] all those people who shopped in our tores.
Sanyo had a plant here [in Arkansas] making television sets for ears, and Sears cut them off, so they decided they were closing the plant nd going to move part to Mexico and part to Asia.
Our governor asked f we would help.
We decided we would buy television sets from Sanyo if they would keep the plant in Arkansas], and they didn't want to do it.
hey wanted to move it, and [the governor] even talked to the [Japanese wning] family to try to persuade them to stay.
Between his efforts and urs, we persuaded them to do it.
They are now the world's largest pro ucer of televisions.
We just bought our fifty millionth set from them.
ut for the most part people in this country have just abandoned the anufacturing process.
They say, 1 want to sell to you, but I don't want he responsibility for the buildings and employees [and health care].
I ant to source it somewhere else.'
So we were forced to source mer handise in other places in the world."
He added, "One of my concerns s that, with the manufacturing out of this country, one day we'll all be elling hamburgers to each other."
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD he best way to get a taste of Wal-Mart's power as a global flattener is o visit Japan.
Commodore Matthew Calbraith Perry opened a largely losed Japanese society to the Western world on July 8,1853, when he ar ived in Edo (Tokyo) Bay with four big black steamships bristling with uns.
According to the Naval Historical Center Web site, the Japanese, ot knowing that steamships even existed, were shocked by the sight of hem and thought they were "giant dragons puffing smoke."
Commodore erry returned a year later, and on March 31,1854, concluded the Treaty f Kanagawa with the Japanese authorities, gaining U.S. vessels access to he ports of Shimoda and Hakodate and opening a U.S. consulate in himoda.
This treaty led to an explosion of trade between Japan and the nited States, helped open Japan to the Western world generally, and is idely credited with triggering the modernization of the Japanese state, as he Japanese realized how far behind they were and rushed to catch up.
nd catch up they did.
In so many areas, from automobiles to consumer lectronics to machine tools, from the Sony Walkman to the Lexus, the apanese learned every lesson they could from Western nations and then roceeded to beat us at our own gameexcept one: retailing, especially iscount retailing.
Japan could make those Sonys like nobody else, but hen it came to selling them at a discount, well, that was another matter.
o almost exactly 150 years after Commodore Perry signed that reaty, another lesser-known treaty was signed, actually a business part ership.
Call it the Seiyu-Wal-Mart Treaty of 2003.
Unlike Commodore erry, Wal-Mart did not have to muscle its way into Japan with warships.
ts reputation preceded it, which is why it was invited in by Seiyu, a strug ling Japanese retail chain desperate to adapt the Wal-Mart formula in apan, a country notorious for resisting big-box discount stores.
As I trav led on the bullet train from Tokyo to Numazu, site of the first Seiyu tore that was using the Wal-Mart methods, the New York Times transla or pointed out that this store was located about one hundred miles from himoda and that first U.S. consulate.
Commodore Perry probably ould have loved shopping in the new Seiyu store, where all the music iped in consists of Western tunes designed to lull shoppers into filling heir carts, and where you can buy a man's suitmade in Chinafor 65 and a white shirt to go with it for $5.
Around Wal-Mart that's called HE WORLD IS FLAT DLPEvery Day Low Pricesand this was one of the first phrases al-Mart folks learned to say in Japanese.
al-Mart's flattening effects are fully on display in the Seiyu store in umazu  not just the everyday low prices, but the wide aisles, the big allets of household goods, the huge signs displaying the lowest prices in ach category, and the Wal-Mart supply-chain computer system so that tore managers can quickly adjust stock.
asked Seiyu's C E O , Masao Kiuchi, why he had turned to Wal-Mart.
The first time I knew about Wal-Mart was about fifteen years ago," ex lained Kiuchi.
"I went to Dallas to see the Wal-Mart stores, and I hought this was a very rational method.
It was two things: One was the ignage showing the prices.
It was very easy for us to understand."
The sec nd, he said, was that the Japanese thought a discount store meant that ou sold cheap products at cheap prices.
What he realized from shopping t Wal-Mart, and seeing everything from plasma TVs to top-brand pet roducts, was that Wal-Mart sold quality products at low prices.
At the store in Dallas, I took pictures, and I brought those pictures to y colleagues in Seiyu and said, Took, we have to see what Wal-Mart is oing on the other side of the planet.'
But showing pictures was not good nough, because how can you understand by just looking at pictures?"
ecalled Kiuchi.
Eventually, Kiuchi approached Wal-Mart, and they igned a partnership on December 31, 2003.
Wal-Mart bought a piece of eiyu; in return, Wal-Mart agreed to teach Seiyu its unique form of col aboration: global supply-chaining to bring consumers the best goods at he lowest prices.
here was one big thing, though, that Seiyu had to teach Wal-Mart, iuchi told me: how to sell raw fish.
Japanese discounters and depart ent stores all have grocery sections, and they all carry fish for very iscriminating Japanese consumers.
Seiyu will discount fish several imes during each day, as the freshness declines.
Wal-Mart doesn't understand raw fish," said Kiuchi.
"We are ex ecting their help with general merchandising."
ive Wal-Mart time.
I expect that in the not-too-distant future we will ee Wal-Mart sushi.
omebody had better warn the tuna.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD NSOURCING hat the Guys in Funny Brown Shorts re Really Doing e of the most enjoyable things about researching this book has  ^ / b e e n discovering all sorts of things happening in the world around e of which I had no clue.
Nothing was more surprisingly interesting han pulling the curtain back on UPS, United Parcel Service.
Yes, those olks, the ones who wear the homely brown shorts and drive those ugly rown trucks.
Turns out that while I was sleeping, stodgy old UPS be ame a huge force flattening the world.
nce again, it was one of my Indian tutors, Nandan Nilekani, the nfosys CEO, who tipped me off to this.
"FedEx and UPS should be one f your flatteners.
They're not just delivering packages, they are doing lo istics," he told me on the phone from Bangalore one day.
Naturally, I iled the thought away, making a note to check it out, without having any lue what he was getting at.
A few months later I went to China, and hile there I was afflicted with jet lag one night and was watching CNN nternational to pass the wee hours of the morning.
At one point, a com ercial came on for UPS, and its tag line was UPS's new slogan: "Your orld Synchronized."
he thought occurred to me: That must be what Nandan was talking bout!
UPS, I learned, was not just delivering packages anymore; it was ynchronizing global supply chains for companies large and small.
The ext day I made an appointment to visit UPS headquarters in Atlanta.
I ater toured the UPS Worldport distribution hub adjacent to the ouisville International Airport, which at night is basically taken over by he UPS fleet of cargo jets, as packages are flown in from all over the orld, sorted, and flown back out again a few hours later.
(The UPS fleet f 270 aircraft is the eleventh largest airline in the world.)
What I discov red on these visits was that this is not your father's UPS.
Yes, UPS still ulls in most of its $36 billion in sales by shipping more than 13.5 mil ion packages a day from point A to point B.
But behind that innocuous HE WORLD IS FLAT aade, the company founded in Seattle in 1907 as a messenger service as reinvented itself as a dynamic supply-chain manager.
onsider this: If you own a Toshiba laptop computer that is under war anty and it breaks and you call Toshiba to have it repaired, Toshiba will tell ou to drop it off at a UPS store and have it shipped to Toshiba, and it will et repaired and then be shipped back to you.
But here's what they don't tell ou: UPS doesn't just pick up and deliver your Toshiba laptop.
UPS actu lly repairs the computer in its own UPS-run workshop dedicated to com uter and printer repairs at its Louisville hub.
I went to tour that hub xpecting to see only packages moving around, and instead I found myself ressed in a blue smock, in a special clean room, watching UPS employees eplacing motherboards in broken Toshiba laptops.
Toshiba had developed n image problem several years ago, with some customers concluding that ts repair process for broken machines took too long.
So Toshiba came to PS and asked it to design a better system.
UPS said, "Look, instead of us icking up the machine from your customers, bringing it to our hub, then lying it from our hub to your repair facility and then flying it back to our ub and then from our hub to your customer's house, let's cut out all the iddle steps.
We, UPS, will pick it up, repair it ourselves, and send it right ack to your customer."
It is now possible to send your Toshiba laptop in ne day, get it repaired the next, and have it back the third day.
The UPS re airmen and -women are all certified by Toshiba, and its customer com laints have gone down dramatically.
ut this is just a sliver of what UPS does today.
Eaten a Papa John's izza lately?
If you see the branded Papa John's supply truck go by, ask ho's dispatching the drivers and scheduling the pickups of supplies, like omatoes, pizza sauce, and onions.
Answer: UPS.
UPS comes inside a lot f companies now and takes over their branded vehicles to assure on-time elivery, which in the case of Papa John's includes getting the pizza dough rom bakeries to outlets at exactly the right times each day.
Tired of shop ing for tennis shoes at the mall?
Go online and order a pair of Nikes from ts Web site, Nike.com.
The order, though, is actually routed to UPS, and  UPS employee picks, inspects, packs, and delivers your shoes for Nike nline from a warehouse in Kentucky managed by UPS.
Ditto if you order ome underwear from Jockey.com.
UPS employees, who manage Jockey HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD roducts at a UPS warehouse, will actually fill the order, bag it, label it, nd deliver it to you.
Your HP printer breaks in Europe or Latin America?
he field service repairman who comes to your door to fix it works for PS, which manages the replacement parts and repairs divisions for HP in hose markets.
Order some tropical fish from Segrest Farms in Florida to e delivered to your door in Canada by UPS?
UPS worked with the com any to develop a special packaging for the fish so they would not be in ured as they traveled through UPS's sorting systems.
The fish are even ildly sedated for safe travel (like kids on Dramamine).
"We wanted them o have a pleasant ride," said UPS spokesman Steve Holmes.
hat is going on here?
It's a process that has come to be called "insourcing"a whole new form of collaboration and creating value hori ontally, made possible by the flat world and flattening it even more.
In he previous section I discussed why supply-chaining is so important in he flat world.
But not every company, indeed very few companies, can fford to develop and support a complex global supply chain of the scale nd scope that Wal-Mart has developed.
That is what gave birth to insourcing.
Insourcing came about because once the world went flat, the mall could act bigsmall companies could suddenly see around the orld.
Once they did, they saw a lot of places where they could sell their oods, manufacture their goods, or buy their raw materials in a more ef icient manner.
But many of them either didn't know how to pull all this ff or couldn't afford to manage a complex global supply chain on their wn.
Many big companies didn't want to manage this complexity, which hey felt was not part of their core competency.
Nike would rather spend ts cash and energy designing better tennis shoes, not supply chains.
his created a whole new global business opportunity for traditional ackage delivery firms like UPS.
In 1996, UPS went into the business of synchronized commerce solutions."
It has spent $1 billion since then to uy twenty-five different global logistics and freight-forwarding firms so hat it can service virtually any supply chain from one corner of the flat arth to the other.
The business took off right around 2000.
I like the erm "insourcing" because UPS engineers come right inside your com any; analyze its manufacturing, packaging, and delivery processes; and hen design, redesign, and manage your whole global supply chain.
And, HE WORLD IS FLAT f necessary, they'll even finance parts of it, such as receivables and COD ayments.
There are companies today (many of them don't want their ames mentioned) that never touch their own products anymore.
UPS versees the whole journey from factory to warehouse to customer to epair.
It even collects the money from customers if need be.
This form f deep collaboration, which involves a huge amount of trust and inti acy among UPS, its client, and its client's customers, is a uniquely new lattener.
You know who the majority of our customers and partners are?
mall businesses," said UPS chairman and C E O Mike Eskew.
"That's ight.
They are asking us to take them global.
We help these compa ies achieve parity with the bigger guys."
ndeed, when you are a small business or individual working at home, nd you can plug into UPS and have it become your global supply-chain anager, you can pretend you are a lot bigger than you are.
When the mall can act big, it levels the competitive playing field even more.
UPS ought Mail Boxes, Etc.
(now "The UPS Store" in the United States) so hat it could offer individuals and small businesses the power of its global upply-chain services.
But UPS also helps the big to act small.
When you re a huge conglomerate, like HP, and you can get packages delivered or oods repaired quickly anywhere in the world, you can act really small.
n addition, by making the delivery of goods and services around the orld superefficient and superfastand in huge volumes UPS is help ng to level customs barriers and harmonize trade by getting more and ore people to adopt the same rules and labels and tracking systems for ransporting goods.
UPS has a smart label on all its packages so that pack ges can be tracked and traced anywhere in its network.
orking with the U.S. Customs Service, UPS designed a software rogram that allows customs to say to UPS, "I want to see any package oving through your Worldport hub that was sent from Cali, Colombia, o Miami by someone named Carlos."
Or, "I want to see any package ent from Germany to the United States by someone named Osama."
hen the package arrives for sorting, the UPS computers will automati ally route that package to a customs officer in the UPS hub.
A comput rized arm will literally slide it off the conveyor belt and dump it into a HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD in for a closer look.
It makes the inspection process more efficient and oes not interrupt the general flow of packages.
These efficiencies of ime and scale save UPS's clients money, enabling them to recycle their apital and fund more innovation.
But the level of collaboration it re uires between UPS and its clients is unusual.
low & Hearth is a large national catalog and Internet retailer spe ializing in "Products for Country Living."
P&H came to UPS one day nd said that too many of its furniture deliveries were coming to cus omers with a piece broken.
Did UPS have any ideas?
UPS sent its "pack ge engineers" over and conducted a packaging seminar for the P&H rocurement group.
UPS also provided guidelines for them to use in the election of their suppliers.
The objective was to help P&H understand hat its purchase decisions from its suppliers should be influenced not nly by the quality of the products being offered but also by how those roducts were being packaged and delivered.
UPS couldn't help its cus omer P&H without looking deep inside its business and then into its uppliers' businesseswhat boxes and packing materials they were us ng.
That is insourcing.
onsider the collaboration today among eBay sellers, UPS, PayPal, nd eBay buyers.
Say I offer to sell a golf club on eBay and you decide to uy it.
I e-mail you a PayPal invoice, which has your name and mailing ddress on it.
At the same time, eBay offers me an icon on its Web site to rint out a UPS mailing label to you.
When I print that mailing label on y own printer, it comes out with a UPS tracking bar code on it.
At the ame time, UPS, through its computer system, creates a tracking number hat corresponds to that label, which automatically gets e-mailed to outhe person who bought my golf clubso you can track the pack ge by yourself, online, on a regular basis and know exactly when it will each you.
f UPS had not gone into this business, someone would have had to nvent it.
With so many more people working through horizontal global upply chains far from home, somebody had to fill in the inevitable holes nd tighten the weak links.
Said Kurt Kuehn, UPS's senior vice president or sales and marketing, "The Texas machine parts guy is worried that the ustomer in Malaysia is a credit risk.
We step in as a trusted broker.
If we HE WORLD IS FLAT ave control of that package, we can collect funds subject to acceptance nd eliminate letters of credit.
Trust can be created through personal re ations or through systems and controls.
If you don't have trust, you can ely on a shipper who does not turn [your package] over until he is paid.
e have more ability than a bank to manage this, because we have the ackage and the ongoing relationship with the customer as collateral, so e have two points of leverage."
ore than sixty companies have moved operations closer to the UPS ub in Louisville since 1997, so they can make things and ship them traight from the hub, without having to warehouse them.
But it is not ust the little guys who benefit from the better logistics and more efficient upply chains that insourcing can provide.
In 2001, Ford Motor Co. urned over its snarled and slow distribution network to UPS, allowing PS to come deep inside Ford to figure out what its problems were and mooth out its supply chain.
For years, the bane of most Ford dealers was the automaker's Rube oldberg-like system for getting cars from factory to showroom," usinessWeek reported in its July 19, 2004, issue.
"Cars could take as ong as a month to arrivethat is, when they weren't lost along the way.
nd Ford Motor Co. was not always able to tell its dealers exactly what as coming, or even what was in inventory at the nearest rail yards.
'We'd ose track of whole trainloads of cars,' recalls Jerry Reynolds, owner of restige Ford in Garland, Tex.
'It was crazy.'"
But after UPS got under ord's hood, "UPS engineers... redesigned Ford's entire North Ameri an delivery network, streamlining everything from the route cars take rom the factory to how they're processed at regional sorting hubs" ncluding pasting bar codes on the windshields of the four million cars oming out of Ford's U.S. plants so they could be tracked just like pack ges.
As a result, UPS cut the time it takes autos to arrive at dealer lots by 0 percent, to ten days on average.
BusinessWeek reported: "That saves ord millions in working capital each year and makes it easy for its 6,500 ealers to track down the models most in demand .
'It was the most mazing transformation I had ever seen,' marvels Reynolds.
'My last omment to UPS was: 'Can you get us spare parts like this?'
" PS maintains a think tank, the Operations Research Division, in HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD imonium, Maryland, which works on supply-chain algorithms.
This school" of mathematics is called "package flow technology," and it is de igned to constantly match the deployment of UPS trucks, ships, air lanes, and sorting capabilities with that day's flow of packages around he world.
"Now we can make changes in our network in hours to adjust o changes in volume," says UPS C E O Eskew.
"How I optimize the total upply chain is the key to the math."
The sixty-person UPS team in imonium is made up largely of people with engineering and math de rees, including several Ph.D.'s.
PS also employs its own meteorologists and strategic threat analysts to rack which atmospheric or geopolitical thunderstorms it will have to work round on any given day.
To further grease its supply chains, UPS is the argest private user of wireless technology in the world, as its drivers alone ake over one million phone calls a day in the process of picking up and elivering packages through its eighty-eight thousand package cars, vans, ractors, and motorcycles.
On any given day, according to UPS, 2 percent f the world's GDP can be found in UPS delivery trucks or package cars.
h, and did I mention that UPS also has a financing armUPS apitalthat will put up the money for the transformation of your supply hain, particularly if you are a small business and don't have the capital?
or example, notes Eskew, UPS was doing business with a small iotech company in Canada that sold blood adhesives, a highly perish ble alternative to stitches.
The company had a growing market among he major hospital chains, but it had a problem keeping up with demand nd could not get financing.
It had distribution centers on the East and est coasts.
UPS redesigned the company's system based around a re rigerator hub in Dallas and extended it financing through UPS Capital.
he result, said Eskew, was less inventory, better cash flow, better cus omer serviceand an embedded customer for UPS.
A maker of bridal eadpieces and veils in Montreal wanted to improve its flow of business ith the United States.
Eskew recalled, "We designed a system for con olidated [customs] clearances, so their veils and headpieces would not ave to come over [the border] one by one.
And then we put [the mer handise] in a warehouse in [Upstate] New York.
We took the orders by nternet, we put the labels on, we delivered the packages and collected HE WORLD IS FLAT he money, and we put that money through UPS Capital into their banks lectronically so they had the cash back.
That allows them to enter new arkets and minimize their inventory."
skew explained, "When our grandfathers owned shops, inventory as what was in the back room.
Now it is a box two hours away on a pack ge car, or it might be hundreds more crossing the country by rail or jet, nd you have thousands more crossing the ocean.
And because we all ave visibility into that supply chain, we can coordinate all those modes f transportation."
ndeed, as consumers have become more empowered to pull their wn products via the Internet and customize them for themselves, UPS as found itself in the interesting position of being not only the company ctually taking the orders but also, as the delivery service, the one hand ng the goods to the buyer at the front door.
As a result, companies said, Let's try to push as many differentiating things to the end of the supply hain, rather than the beginning."
And because UPS was the last link in he supply chain before these goods were loaded onto planes, trains, and rucks, it took over many of these functions, creating a whole new busi ess called End of Runway Services.
The day I visited Louisville, two oung UPS women were putting together Nikon cameras, with special emory cards and leather cases, which some store had offered as a week nd special.
They were even putting them in special boxes just for that tore.
By taking over this function, UPS gives companies more options to ustomize products at the last minute.
PS has also taken full advantage of the Netscape and work flow latteners.
Before 1995, all tracking and tracing of UPS packages for cus omers was done through a call center.
You called a UPS 800 number nd asked an operator where your package was.
During the week before hristmas, UPS operators were fielding six hundred thousand calls on he peak days.
Each one of those calls cost UPS $2.10 to handle.
Then, hrough the 1990s, as more and more UPS customers became empow red and comfortable with the Internet, and as its own tracking and trac ng system improved with advances in wireless technology, UPS invited ts customers to track packages themselves over the Internet, at a cost to PS of 50 to 100 a query.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD So we dramatically reduced our service costs and increased service/' aid UPS vice president Ken Sternad, especially since UPS now pulls in even million tracking requests on an average day and a staggering twelve illion on peak days.
At the same time, its drivers also became more em owered with their DIADsdriver delivery information acquisition de ices.
These are the brown electronic clipboards that you always see the PS drivers carrying around.
The latest generation of them tells each river where in his truck to load each package exactly what position on he shelf.
It also tells him where his next stop is, and if he goes to the rong address, the GPS system built into the DIAD won't allow him to eliver the package.
It also allows Mom to go online and find out when he driver will be in her neighborhood dropping off her package.
nsourcing is distinct from supply-chaining because it goes well beyond upply-chain management.
Because it is third-party-managed logistics, it re uires a much more intimate and extensive kind of collaboration among PS and its clients and its clients' clients.
In many cases today, UPS and its mployees are so deep inside their clients' infrastructure that it is almost im ossible to determine where one stops and the other starts.
The UPS people re not just synchronizing your packagesthey are synchronizing your hole company and its interaction with both customers and suppliers.
This is no longer a vendor-customer relationship," said Eskew.
"We nswer your phones, we talk to your customers, we house your inventory, nd we tell you what sells and doesn't sell.
We have access to your infor ation and you have to trust us.
We manage competitors, and the only ay for this to work, as our founders told Gimbels and Macy's, is 'trust s.' I won't violate that.
Because we are asking people to let go of part of heir business, and that really requires trust."
PS is creating enabling platforms for anyone to take his or her busi ess global or to vastly improve the efficiency of his or her global supply hain.
It is a totally new business, but UPS is convinced it has an almost imidess upside.
Time will tell.
Though margins are still thin in this kind f work, in 2003 alone insourcing pulled in $2.4 billion in revenues for PS.
My gut tells me the folks in the funny brown shorts and funny brown rucks are on to something bigsomething made possible only by the flat ening of the world and something that is going to flatten it a lot more.
HE WORLD IS FLAT  l A T T I M R  I ) N-FORMING oogle, Yahoo!, MSN Web Search y friend and I met a guy at a restaurant.
My friend was very taken with him, ut I was suspiciously curious about this guy.
After a few minutes of Googling, 1 ound out that he was arrested for felony assault.
Although I was once again dis ppointed with the quality of the dating pool, I was at least able to warn my riend about this guy's violent past.
Testimonial from Google user  am completely delighted with the translation service.
My partner arranged for wo laborers to come and help with some demolition.
There was a miscommunication: she asked for the workers to come at 11 a.m., and the labor service sent hem at 8:30.
They speak only Spanish, and I speak English and some French.
ur Hispanic neighbors were out.
With the help of the translation service, I was ble to communicate with the workers, to apologize for the miscommunication, stablish the expectation, and ask them to come back at 11.
Thank you for pro iding this connection .
Thank you Google.
Testimonial from Google user  just want to thank Google for teaching me how to find love.
While looking for y estranged brother, I stumbled across a Mexican Web site for male strippers nd I was shocked.
My brother was working as a male prostitute!
The first hance I got, I flew to the city he was working in to liberate him from this de rading profession.
I went to the club he was working at and found my brother.
ut more than that, I met one of his co-workers.
We got married last weekend in Mexico], and I am positive without Google's services, I never would have ound my brother, my husband, or the surprisingly lucrative nature of the male tripping industry in Mexico!!
Thank you, Google!
Testimonial from Google user HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD  ogle headquarters in Mountain View, California, has a certain pcot Center feel to itso many fun space-age toys to play with, so ittle time.
In one corner is a spinning globe that emits light beams based n the volume of people searching on Google.
As you would expect, most f the shafts of light are shooting up from North America, Europe, Korea, apan, and coastal China.
The Middle East and Africa remain pretty dark.
n another corner is a screen that shows a sample of what things people re searching for at that moment, all over the world.
When I was there in 001,1 asked my hosts what had been the most frequent searches lately.
ne, of course, was "sex," a perennial favorite of Googlers.
Another was God."
Lots of people searching for Him or Her.
A third was "jobs"you an't find enough of those.
And the fourth most searched item around he time of my visit?
I didn't know whether to laugh or cry: "professional restling."
The weirdest one, though, is the Google recipe book, where eople just open their refrigerators, see what ingredients are inside, type hree of them into Google, and see what recipes come up!
ortunately, no single word or subject accounts for more than 1 or 2 ercent of all Google searches at any given time, so no one should get oo worried about the fate of humanity on the basis of Google's top earch items on any particular day.
Indeed, it is the remarkable diversity f searches going on via Google, in so many different tongues, that makes he Google search engine (and search engines in general) such huge latteners.
Never before in the history of the planet have so many eopleon their ownhad the ability to find so much information bout so many things and about so many other people.
aid Russian-born Google cofounder Sergey Brin, "If someone has roadband, dial-up, or access to an Internet caf, whether a kid in ambodia, the university professor, or me who runs this search engine, ll have the same basic access to overall research information that any ne has.
It is a total equalizer.
This is very different than how I grew up.
y best access was some library, and it did not have all that much stuff, nd you either had to hope for a miracle or search for something very HE WORLD IS FLAT imple or something very recent."
When Google came along, he added, uddenly that kid had "universal access" to the information in libraries ll over the world.
hat is certainly Google's goalto make easily available all the world's nowledge in every language.
And Google hopes that in time, with a almPilot or a cell phone, everyone everywhere will be able to carry round access to all the world's knowledge in their pockets.
"Everything" nd "everyone" are key words that you hear around Google all the time.
ndeed, the official Google history carried on its home page notes that the ame "Google" is a play on the word " googol,' which is the number rep esented by the numeral 1 followed by 100 zeros.
Google's use of the term eflects the company's mission to organize the immense, seemingly infi ite amount of information available on the Web," just for you.
What oogle's success reflects is how much people are interested in having just hatall the world's knowledge at their fingertips.
There is no bigger flat ener than the idea of making all the world's knowledge, or even just a big hunk of it, available to anyone and everyone, anytime, anywhere.
We do discriminate only to the degree that if you can't use a com uter or don't have access to one, you can't use Google, but other than hat, if you can type, you can use Google," said Google C E O Eric chmidt.
And surely if the flattening of the world means anything, he dded, it means that "there is no discrimination in accessing knowledge.
oogle is now searchable in one hundred languages, and every time we ind another we increase it.
Let's imagine a group with a Google iPod ne day and you can tell it to search by voicethat would take care of eople who can't use a computerand then [Google access] just be omes about the rate at which we can get cheap devices into people's ands."
ow does searching fit into the concept of collaboration?
I call it "in orming."
In-forming is the individual's personal analog to uploading, out ourcing, insourcing, supply-chaining, and offshoring.
In-forming is the bility to build and deploy your own personal supply chaina supply hain of information, knowledge, and entertainment.
In-forming is about elf-collaborationbecoming your own self-directed and self-empowered HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD esearcher, editor, and selector of entertainment, without having to go to he library or the movie theater or through network television.
In-forming s searching for knowledge.
It is about seeking like-minded people and ommunities.
Google's phenomenal global popularity, which has spurred ahoo!
and Microsoft (through its MSN Search) also to make power earching and in-forming prominent features of their Web sites, shows ow hungry people are for this form of collaboration.
Google is now pro essing roughly one billion searches per day, up from 150 million just hree years ago.
he easier and more accurate searching becomes, added Larry Page, oogle's other cofounder, the more global Google's user base becomes, nd the more powerful a flattener it becomes.
Every day more and more eople are able to in-form themselves in their own language.
Today, said age, "only a third of our searches are U.S.-based, and less than half are n English."
Moreover, he added, "as people are searching for more ob cure things, people are publishing more obscure things," which drives he flattening effect of in-forming even more.
All the major search en ines have also recently added the capability for users to search not only he Web for information but also their own computer's hard drive for ords or data or e-mail they know is in there somewhere but have for otten where.
When you can search your own memory more efficiently, hat is really in-forming.
In late 2004, Google announced plans to scan he entire contents of both the University of Michigan and Stanford niversity libraries, making tens of thousands of books available and earchable online.
n the earliest days of search engines, people were amazed and de ighted to stumble across the information they sought; eureka moments ere unexpected surprises, said Yahoo !
s cofounder Jerry Yang.
"Today heir attitudes are much more presumptive.
They presume that the infor ation they're looking for is certainly available and that it's just a matter of echnologists making it easier to get to, and in fewer keystrokes," he said.
The democratization of information is having a profound impact on so iety.
Today's consumers are much more efficientthey can find infor ation, products, services, faster [through search engines] than through HE WORLD IS FLAT raditional means.
They are better informed about issues related to work, ealth, leisure, etc.
Small towns are no longer disadvantaged relative to hose with better access to information.
And people have the ability to be etter connected to things that interest them, to quickly and easily be ome experts in given subjects and to connect with others who share heir interests."
oogle's founders understood that by the late 1990s hundreds of housands of Web pages were being added to the Internet each day, and hat existing search engines, which tended to search for keywords, could ot keep pace.
Brin and Page, who met as Stanford University graduate tudents in computer science in 1995, developed a mathematical formula hat ranked a Web page by how many other Web pages were linked to it, n the assumption that the more people linked to a certain page, the ore important the page.
The key breakthrough that enabled Google o become first among search engines was its ability to combine its ageRank technology with an analysis of page content, which determines hich pages are most relevant to the specific search being conducted.
ven though Google entered the market after other major search players, ts answers were seen by people as more accurate and relevant to what hey were looking for.
The fact that one search engine was just a little bet er than the others led a tidal wave of people to switch to it.
(Google now mploys scores of mathematicians working on its search algorithms, in an ffort to always keep them one step more relevant than the competition.)
or some reason, said Brin, "people underestimated the importance f finding information, as opposed to other things you would do online.
f you are searching for something like a health issue, you really want to now; in some cases it is a life-and-death matter.
We have people who earch Google for heart-attack symptoms and then call nine-one-one."
ut sometimes you really want to in-form yourself about something uch simpler.
hen I was in Beijing in June 2004,1 was riding the elevator down ne morning with my wife, Ann, and sixteen-year-old daughter, Natalie, ho was carrying a fistful of postcards written to her friends.
Ann said to er, "Did you bring their addresses along?"
Natalie looked at her as if she HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD ere positively nineteenth-century.
"No," she said, with that you-are-soout-of-it-Mom tone of voice.
"I just Googled their phone numbers, and heir home addresses came up."
ddress book?
You dummy, Mom.
ll that Natalie was doing was in-forming, using Google in a way hat I had no idea was possible.
Thanks to Google, all that digitized in ormation that we were creating with our PCs was suddenly searchable.
t could suddenly be mined.
What is staggering is how much informa ion there is out there information that was never searchable, but will e in the future, thanks to ever smarter search engines, which will be ble to sift through larger and larger mountains of different kinds of atafrom pictures to videos to home listings to traffic reports to high chool newspapers and health cures.
"People have thought about text as he one source of information," said Kai-Fu Lee, who originally set up he Microsoft research center in Beijing and now directs Google's oper tions in China.
"But there are images, videos, books, even from ages go, that now will be searchable.
There is geographical information, aps, and there is local information and there is personal information.
nformation on your computer.
Basically everything we see, hear, ouch, read, and write is informationand right now Internet search overs only a tiny, tiny fraction of everything that could be browsed and earched and navigated."
In time, individuals will have the power to find nything in the world at any time on all kinds of devicesand that will be normously empowering.
"What excites me is the empowerment," added ee.
"I will be able to focus my time and attention and brainpower on hat I do best, which is not looking for stuff."
It is building, designing, magining, and creating stuff.
hile we were traveling in China, Natalie also had her iPod with er, which empowered her to in-form herself in another waywith en ertainment instead of knowledge.
She had become her own music edi or and loaded all her favorite songs onto her iPod and was carrying them ll over China.
Think about it: For decades the broadcast industry was uilt around the idea that you shoot out ads on network television or ra io and hope that someone is watching or listening.
But thanks to the HE WORLD IS FLAT lattening technologies in entertainment, that world is quickly fading way.
Now with TiVo you can become your own T V editor.
TiVo allows iewers to digitally record their favorite programs and skip the ads, except hose they want to see.
You watch what you want when you want.
You on't have to make an appointment with a T V channel at the time and lace someone else sets and watch the commercials foisted on you.
With iVo you can watch only your own shows and the commercials you want or only those products in which you might be interested.
ut just as Google can track what you are searching for, so too can iVo, which knows which shows and which ads you are freezing, storing, nd rewinding on your own TV.
So here's a news quiz: Guess what was the ost rewound moment in T V history?
Answer: Janet's Jackson breast ex osure, or, as it was euphemistically called, her "wardrobe malfunction," at he 2004 Super Bowl.
Just ask TiVo.
In a press release it issued on February , 2004, TiVo said, "Justin Timberlake and Janet Jackson stole the show uring Sunday's Super Bowl, attracting almost twice as many viewers as he most thrilling moments on the field, according to an annual mea urement of second-by-second viewership in TiVo households.
The ackson-Timberlake moment drew the biggest spike in audience reaction iVo has ever measured.
TiVo said viewership spiked up to 180 percent as undreds of thousands of households used TiVo's unique capabilities to ause and replay live television to view the incident again and again."
o if everyone can increasingly watch what he wants however many imes he wants when he wants, the whole notion of broadcast TV hich is that we throw shows out there one time, along with their com ercials, and then try to survey who is watchingwill increasingly make ess and less sense.
The companies you want to bet on are those that, like oogle or Yahoo!
or TiVo, learn to collaborate with their users and offer hem shows and advertisements tailored just for them.
I can imagine a ay soon when advertisers won't pay for anything other than that.
ompanies like Google, Yahoo!, Amazon.com, and TiVo have learned o thrive not by pushing products and services on their customers so much s by building collaborative systems that enable customers to pull on their wn, and then responding with lightning quickness to what they pull.
It is o much more efficient.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD Search is so highly personal that searching is empowering for hu ans like nothing else," said Google C E O Eric Schmidt.
"It is the an ithesis of being told or taught.
It is about self-empowerment; it is mpowering individuals to do what they think best with the information hey want.
It is very different from anything else that preceded it.
Radio as one-to-many.
T V was one-to-many.
The telephone was one-to-one.
earch is the ultimate expression of the power of the individual, using a omputer, looking at the world, and finding exactly what they want nd everyone is different when it comes to that."
f course what made Google not just a search engine but a hugely rofitable business was its founders' realization that they could build a argeted advertising model that would show you ads that are relevant to ou when you searched for a specific topic and then could charge ad ertisers for the number of times Google users clicked on their ads.
hereas CBS broadcasts a movie and has only a rough idea who is atching it or the advertisements, Google knows exactly what you are nterested in after all, you are searching for itand can link you up ith advertisers directly or indirectly connected to your searches.
In ate 2004, Google began a service whereby if you are walking around ethesda, Maryland, and are in the mood for sushi, you just send oogle an SMS message on your cell phone that says "Sushi 20817"  he Bethesda zip codeand it will send you back a text message of hoices.
Lord only knows where this will go.
n-forming, though, also involves searching for friends, allies, and ollaborators.
It is empowering the formation of global communities, cross all international and cultural boundaries, which is another criti ally important flattening function.
People can now search out fellow ollaborators on any subject, project, or themeparticularly through ortals like Yahoo!
Groups.
Yahoo!
has about 300 million users and 4 illion active groups.
Those groups have 13 million unique individuals ccessing them each month from all over the world.
The Internet is growing in the self-services area, and Yahoo!
Groups xemplifies this trend," said Jerry Yang.
"It provides a forum, a platform,  set of tools for people to have private, semiprivate, or public gatherings n the Internet regardless of geography or time.
It enables consumers to HE WORLD IS FLAT ather around topics that are meaningful to them in ways that are either mpractical or impossible offline.
Groups can serve as support groups for omplete strangers who are galvanized by a common issue (coping with are diseases, first-time parents, spouses of active-duty personnel) or who eek others who share similar interests (hobbies as esoteric as dogsledding, blackjack, and indoor tanning have large memberships).
xisting communities can migrate online and flourish in an interactive nvironment (local kids' soccer league, church youth group, alumni rganizations), providing a virtual home for groups interested in sharing, rganizing, and communicating information valuable to cultivating vi rant communities.
Some groups exist only online and could never be as uccessful offline, while others mirror strong real-world communities.
roups can be created instantaneously and dissolved; topics can change r stay constant.
This trend will only grow as consumers increasingly be ome publishers, and they can seek the affinity and community they hoosewhen, where, and how they choose it."
hen individuals are empowered to inform themselves in all these ew ways, it is enormously flatteningbut also enormously frightening.
hy?
Because people will be able to drill down for information about ou and me that used to be either impossible or very difficult to locate.
ur lives and our pasts used to have rock-hard cement floors under hem.
It took a lot to drill through those floors and even then it was of en hard to find out what was really down there.
Yes, those hard floors ometimes protected bad peoplefrom con men to pedophilesas hey moved from town to town.
But they also protected you and me and ur basic privacy, making it difficult for prying strangers to dig too eeply into our past or present.
But Google, Yahoo!, and MSN Search re getting rid of those hard floors, very quickly, so anyone can drill into nyone else's past with a few thumb clicks on a PalmPilot.
You never now anymore what kind of electronic footprints you are leaving in atabases that you assume are private and will now, or soon will be, earchable.
And you may be shocked to discover all the things that eople, or companies, can find out about you from your salary to here you live to your favorite books just by Googling you.
veryone can now be Googledbut everyone now can also Google.
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD oogle also equalizes access to information it has no class boundaries, ew education boundaries, few linguistic boundaries, and virtually no oney boundaries.
If you can get on Google, you have access to the orld's greatest research tool, without having to go to MIT.
"If I can perate Google, I can find anything," said Alan Cohen, then vice president f Airespace, which sells wireless technology.
"Google is like God.
God is ireless, God is everywhere, and God sees everything.
Any questions in the orld, you ask Google."
l.AI T I N 'l R // 10 HE STEROIDS igital, Mobile, Personal, and Virtual ut this iPaq's real distinction is its wirelessness.
It's the first palmtop that can onnect to the Internet and other gadgets in four wireless ways.
For distances up o 30 inches, the iPaq can beam information, like your electronic business card, o another palmtop using an infrared transmitter.
For distances up to 30 feet, it as built-in Bluetooth circuitry .
For distances up to 150 feet, it has a Wi-Fi ntenna.
And for transmissions around the entire planet, the iPaq has one other rick up its sleeve: it's also a cell phone.
If your office can't reach you on this, hen you must be on the International Space Station.
From a New York Times article about HP's new PocketPC, uly 29, 2004 m on the bullet train speeding southwest from Tokyo to Mishima.
he view is spectacular: fishing villages on my left and a snow-dusted t. Fuji on my right.
My colleague Jim Brooke, a Tokyo-based reporter or The New York Times, is sitting across the aisle and paying no attention o the view.
He is engrossed in his computer.
So am I, actually, but he's nline through a wireless connection, and I'm just typing away on a col mn on my unconnected laptop.
Ever since we took a cab together the ther day in downtown Tokyo and Jim whipped out his wireless-enabled HE WORLD IS FLAT aptop in the backseat and e-mailed me something through Yahoo!, I ave been exclaiming at the amazing degree of wireless penetration and onnectivity in japan.
Save for a few remote islands and mountain vil ages, if you have a wireless card in your computer, or any Japanese cell hone, you can get online anywherefrom deep inside the subway sta ions to the bullet trains speeding through the countryside.
Jim knows I m slightly obsessed with the fact that Japan, not to mention most of the est of the world, has so much better wireless connectivity than America.
nyway, Jim likes to rub it in.
See, Tom, I am online right now," he says, as the Japanese countryside hizzes by.
"A friend of mine who's the Times s stringer in Alma Ata just ad a baby and I am congratulating him.
He had a baby girl last night."
Jim eeps giving me updates.
"Now I'm reading the frontings!
"a summary of he day's New York Times headlines.
Finally, I ask Jim, who speaks some apanese, to ask the train conductor to come over.
The conductor ambles y. I ask Jim to ask him how fast we are going.
They rattle back and forth in apanese for a few seconds before Jim translates: "240 kilometers per hour."
shake my head.
We are on a bullet train going 240 km per hourthat's 50 mphand my colleague is answering e-mail from Kazakhstan, and I an't drive from my home in suburban Washington to downtown D.C. ithout my cell phone service being interrupted at least twice.
The day be ore, I was in Tokyo waiting for an appointment with Jim's colleague Todd aun, and he was preoccupied with his Japanese cell phone, which easily onnects to the Internet from anywhere.
"I am a surfer," Todd explained, s he used his thumb to manipulate the keypad.
"For $3 a month I sub cribe to this [Japanese] site that tells me each morning how high the aves are at the beaches near my house.
I check it out, and I decide where he best place to surf is that day."
The more I thought about this, the more I wanted to run for pres dent on a one-issue ticket: "I promise, if elected, that within four years merica will have as good cell phone coverage as Ghana, and in eight ears as good as Japanprovided that the Japanese sign a standstill greement and won't innovate for eight years so we can catch up."
y campaign bumper sticker will be very simple: "Can You Hear Me ow?")
HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD  know that America will catch up sooner or later with the rest of the orld in wireless technology.
It's already happening.
But this section bout the tenth flattener is not just about wireless.
It is about what I call he "steroids."
I call certain new technologies the steroids because they are mplifying and turbocharging all the other flatteners.
They are taking all he forms of collaboration highlighted in this sectionoutsourcing, off horing, uploading, supply-chaining, insourcing, and in-formingand aking it possible to do each and every one of them in a way that is "dig tal, mobile, virtual, and personal," as former HP C E O Carly Fiorina put t in her speeches, thereby enhancing each one and making the world latter by the day.
y "digital," Fiorina means that thanks to the PC-WindowsNetscape-work flow revolutions, all analog content and processes  verything from photography to entertainment to communication to ord processing to architectural design to the management of my home awn sprinkler systemare being digitized and therefore can be shaped, anipulated, and transmitted over computers, the Internet, satellites, or iber-optic cable.
By "virtual," she means that the process of shaping, ma ipulating, and transmitting this digitized content can be done at very igh speeds, with total ease, so that you never have to think about it hanks to all the underlying digital pipes, protocols, and standards that ave now been installed.
By "mobile," she means that thanks to wireless echnology, all this can be done from anywhere, with anyone, through ny device, and can be taken anywhere.
And by "personal," she means hat it can be done by you, just for you, on your own device.
hat does the flat world look like when you take all these new forms f collaboration and turbocharge them in this way?
Let me give just one xample.
Bill Brody, the president of Johns Hopkins, told me this story in he summer of 2004: "I am sitting in a medical meeting in Vail and the doctor] giving a lecture quotes a study from Johns Hopkins University.
nd the guy speaking is touting a new approach to treating prostate can er that went against the grain of the current surgical method.
It was a inimally invasive approach to prostate cancer.
So he quotes a study by r. Patrick Walsh, who had developed the state-of-the-art standard of care or prostate surgery.
This guy who is speaking proposes an alternate HE WORLD IS FLAT ethodwhich was controversialbut he quotes from Walsh's Hopkins tudy in a way that supported his approach.
When he said that, I said to yself, 'That doesn't sound like Dr. Walsh's study.'
So I had a PDA [per onal digital assistant], and I immediately went online [wirelessly] and got nto the Johns Hopkins portal and into Medline and did a search right hile I was sitting there.
Up come all the Walsh abstracts.
I toggled on ne and read it, and it was not at all what the guy was saying it was.
So I aised my hand during the Q and A and read two lines from the abstract, nd the guy just turned beet red."
he digitization and storage of all the Johns Hopkins faculty research n recent years made it possible for Brody to search it instantly and virtu lly without giving it a second thought.
The advances in wireless tech ology made it possible for him to do that search from anywhere with ny device.
And his handheld personal computer enabled him to do that earch personallyby himself, just for himself.
hat are the steroids that made all this possible?
he first steroid has to do with computing: One simple way to think bout computing, at any scale, is that it is composed of three things: com utational capability, storage capability, and input/output capability he speed by which information is drawn in and out of the computer/ torage complexes.
And all of these have been steadily increasing since he days of the first bulky mainframes.
This mutually reinforcing progress onstitutes a significant steroid.
As a result of it, year after year we have een able to digitize, shape, crunch, and transmit more words, music, ata, and entertainment than ever before.
or instance, for several decades now chipmakers have been steadily shrinking the transistors on chips so that electrons have less distance to ravel, thereby speeding up the processing of data," noted BusinessWeek June 20, 2005).
MIPS stands for "millions of instructions per second," and t is one measure of the computational capability of a computer's micro hips.
In 1971, the Intel 4004 microprocessor produced .06 MIPS, or 0,000 instructions per second.
Today's Intel Pentium Processor Extreme dition (with two cores) approaches a theoretical maximum of over 20 bil ion instructions per second.
In 1971, the Intel 4004 microprocessor con- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD ained 2,300 transistors.
Intel's highest-end Itanium processor for 2006 acks 1.7 billion transistors.
ne problem, though, is that these miniature circuits are getting rammed together so tightly that they are heating up and affecting the erformance of chips.
Not to worry.
Chipmakers are continuing to juice p this steroid to make superfast and superfaster chips, by replacing the ingle powerful microprocessor at the heart of a PC with two or more computing cores" that work together in one microprocessor, noted usinesssWeek.
These cores can share the load, so that neither one over eats or uses too much energy.
eanwhile, inputting and outputting data have leaped ahead at a taggering rate.
At the speeds that disk drives operated back in the early ays of 286 and 386 chips, it would have taken about a minute to down oad a single photo from my latest digital camera.
Today I can do that lmost instantaneously on a USB 2.0 disk drive and the latest Intel proces or.
At the same time, the amount of stuff you can now store to input and utput "is off the charts, thanks to the steady advances in storage devices," aid Craig Mundie, Microsoft's chief technology officer.
"Storage is grow ng exponentially, and this is really as much a factor in the revolution s anything else."
It's what is allowing all forms of content to become igital and to some extent portable.
It is also becoming cheap enough hat you can put massive amounts on even the personal devices people arry around with them.
Five years ago, no one would have believed that ou would be able to sell iPods with forty gigabytes of storage, capable of olding thousands of songs, for prices that teenagers could afford.
Now it's een as ho-hum.
And when it comes to moving all these bits around, the omputing world has been turbocharged.
Advances in fiber optics will oon allow a single fiber to carry one terabit per second.
With forty-eight ibers in a cable, that's forty-eight terabits per second.
Henry Schacht, the ormer C E O of Lucent, which specialized in this technology, pointed ut that with that much capacity, you could "transmit all the printed ma erial in the world in minutes in a single cable.
This means unlimited ransmitting capacity at zero incremental cost."
Even though the speeds hat Schacht was talking about apply only to the backbone of the fiber HE WORLD IS FLAT etwork, and not that last mile into your house and into your computer, e are still talking about a quantum leap forward.
n The Lexus and the Olive Tree, I wrote about a 1999 Qwest com ercial showing a businessman, tired and dusty, checking in to a road ide motel in the middle of nowhere.
He asks the bored-looking desk lerk whether they have room service and other amenities.
She says yes.
hen he asks her whether entertainment is available on his room televi ion, and the clerk answers in a what-do-you-think-you-idiot monotone, All rooms have every movie ever made in every language, anytime, day r night."
I wrote about that back then as an example of what happens hen you get connected to the Internet.
Today it is an example of how uch you can now get disconnected from the Internet, because in the ext few years, as storage continues to advance and become more and ore miniaturized, you will be able to buy enough storage to carry many f those movies around in your pocket.
he second steroid involves breakthroughs in instant messaging nd file sharing.
File sharing, the peer-to-peer model, allows computer sers to share songs, video, and other kinds of files with one another nline.
Peer-to-peer networks emerged in the public eye with Napster, hich enabled any two of us to share songs stored on each other's omputers.
"At its peak," according to Howstuffworks.com, "Napster was erhaps the most popular Web site ever created.
In less than a ear, it went from zero to 60 million visitors per month.
Then it was hut down by a court order because of copyright violations, and ouldn't re-launch until 2003 as a legal music-download site.
The orig nal Napster became so popular so quickly because it offered a unique roductfree music that you could obtain nearly effortlessly from a igantic database."
That database was actually a file-sharing architec ure by which Napster facilitated a connection between my computer nd yours so that we could swap music files.
The original Napster is ead, but file-sharing technology is still around and is getting more so histicated every day, greatly enhancing collaboration.
Some 330 mil ion tracks were purchased online in 2004 from online stores such as pple's iTunes, the Associated Press reported on June 22, 2005, but round 5 billion were downloaded for free by people tapping open file- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD haring networks using freely downloadable file-sharing programs such s eDonkey, BitTorrent, and Kazaa.
he third steroid involves breakthroughs in making phone calls over he Internet.
Collaborating with all this digitized data is going to be ade even easier and cheaper thanks to another burgeoning steroid  oice over Internet protocol service, known as VoIP.
VoIP allows you to ake phone calls over the Internet by turning voices into data packets hat are sent down Internet networks and converted back into voices on he other end.
VoIP allows anyone who subscribes to the service through is phone company or private operator to receive unlimited local and ong-distance phone calls, via the Internet, over his personal computer, aptop, or PDAwith just a small microphone attachment.
It is personal nd it will be delivered virtuallythe underlying pipes will make it hap en without your having to think about it at all.
It will make every busi ess and personal phone call to anywhere in the world as cheap as a local all i.e., almost free.
If that won't amplify every form of collaboration, I on't know what will.
onsider this item from the November 1, 2004, BusinessWeek, about he pioneering VoIP company Skype: "Eriksen Translations Inc. is a small usiness with a big footprint.
The Brooklyn (N.Y.) company relies on ,000 freelancers scattered around the world to help translate business ocuments in 75 languages for U.S. clients.
That means phone bills of bout $1,000 a month.
So when business development manager Claudia aitman heard about a new company called Skype Technologies that of ers free voice calls over the Internet to other Skype users anywhere in the orld, she jumped.
Six months after signing up, Eriksen's phone costs al eady have fallen 10 percent.
Even better, its employees and freelancers onfer more often, allowing them to work faster and more efficiently.
I t as changed the whole way we work,' Waitman says."
In late 2005, Skype ame out with a 2.0 beta version of its phone-calling software that some ay will make this technology even more popular.
It includes videocon erencing capability, a smoother, clearer interface, and a handset system o you can make Internet-based phone calls without being tied to a mi rophone attached to your computer.
More and more I run into parents ho tell me they have kids studying or stationed around the world whom  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hey talk to regularly now, for virtually nothing, thanks to Skype and ther VoIP systems.
oIP is going to revolutionize the telecommunications industry, hich, since its inception, has been based on the simple notion that ompanies charge you for how long you talk and over what distance.
As onsumers get more VoIP choices, the competition will be such that elecom companies won't be able to charge for time and distance much onger.
Voice will become free.
What phone companies will compete ver, and charge for, will be the add-ons.
The old voice platform did not end itself well to innovation.
But when you put voice on an Internet latform, all sorts of innovative options for collaboration become possi le.
You will have a buddy list of people and all you will have to do is ouble-click on a name and the call will go through.
You want caller ID?
he caller's picture will come up on your screen.
Companies will com ete over SoIP (services over the Internet protocol): who can offer you he best videoconferencing while you are talking over your computer, DA, or laptop; who can enable you to talk to someone while easily nviting a third or fourth person into the conversation; who can enable ou to talk and swap document files and send text messages at the same ime, so you can actually speak and work on a document together while alking.
You will be able to leave someone a voice message that can be onverted to text, along with a document attachment that the two of you ay be working on.
Said Mike Volpi, Cisco's senior vice president for outing technology, "It won't be about distance and how long you talk, ut how you create value around voice communication.
The voice will e free; it's what you enable customers to do around it that will differen iate companies."
eople who live in Bangalore or Beijing will be able to get themselves isted in the Yellow Pages in New York.
Looking for an accountant?
Just ouble-click Hang Zhou in Beijing or Vladimir Tolstoy in Moscow or rnst & Young in New York.
Take your choice for accounting: Tianan en Square, Red Square, or Union Square.
They'll be happy to collab rate with you in filling out your tax returns.
he fourth steroid is videoconferencing, which is going to a whole ew level.
HP and the film company DreamWorks SKG collaborated on HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD he design of a videoconferencing suitewith DreamWorks bringing its ovie and sound expertise and HP contributing its computing and ompression technologythat is breathtaking.
Each party to the videoconference sits at a long table facing a wall of flat-panel T V screens and ameras pointed at them.
The flat-panel screens display the people at the ther site, which could be anywhere in the world.
It creates an effect of veryone sitting around a single conference table and is apparently a qual tatively different experience from anything that has been on the market efore.
I had a chance to participate in a demonstration of it, and it was so ealistic that you could practically feel the breath of the other parties to the idoconfrence, when in fact half of us were in Santa Barbara and half erefivehundred miles away.
Because DreamWorks is doing film and an mation work all over the world, it felt that it had to have a videoconfer ncing solution where its creative people could really communicate all heir thoughts, facial expressions, feelings, ire, enthusiasm, and raised eye rows.
HP's chief strategy and technology officer, Shane Robison, told me hat HP plans to have these videoconferencing suites for sale by 2005 at a ost of roughly $250,000 each.
That is nothing compared to the airline ickets and wear and tear on executives having to travel regularly to ondon or Tokyo for face-to-face meetings.
Companies could easily make ne of these suites pay for itself in a year.
This level of videoconferencing, nce it proliferates, will make remote development, outsourcing, and off horing that much easier and more efficient.
fifth steroid involves recent advances in computer graphics  riven in part by the advances in computer games.
These are greatly en ancing video collaboration and computing generally by offering so uch sharper images and so many more ways to illustrate and manipu ate those images on a screen.
IBM's Irving Wladawsky-Berger intro uced me to this steroid in his blog.
"One of the most exciting areas of nnovation is emerging around what I'd like to call 3rd Generation User nterfaces, inspired by game players," he wrote.
"[These promise] to ring highly visual, interactive interfaces to all sorts of applications in ealth care, education, science and business."
This is important, he dded, "because every time a new paradigm emerges in the way people nteract with computers, we've seen all kinds of new applications begin HE WORLD IS FLAT o appear, qualitatively better than and different from anything be ore .
Video games are particularly important in this regard, because n addition to their very realistic visual images and great sound, they are lso highly interactive and increasingly collaborative, and thus a good aunch pad for thinking about how people should best interact with all inds of computer applications as well as with each other in the future."
he sixth, and maybe most important, steroid really a group of teroids involves the new wireless technologies and devices.
These are he iibersteroids that make us, and all the new forms of collaboration, obile, so that now we can manipulate, share, and shape our digital con ent from anywhere, with anyone, totally mobilely.
The natural state of communications is wireless," argued Alan ohen, the senior vice president at Airespace.
It started with voice, be ause people wanted to be able to make a phone call anytime, from any lace, to anywhere.
That is why for many people the cell phone is the ost important phone they own.
By the early twenty-first century, people egan to develop that same expectation and with it the desire for data ommunication the ability to access the Internet, e-mail, or any busi ess files anytime, anywhere, using a cell phone, PalmPilot, or some ther personal device.
(And now a third element is entering the picture, reating more demand for wireless technology and enhancing the flat ening of the earth: machines talking to machines wirelessly, such as al-Mart's RFID chips, the little wireless devices that automatically ransmit information to suppliers' computers, allowing them to track nventory.)
n the early days of computing (Globalization 2.0), you worked in the ffice.
There was a big mainframe computer, and you literally had to alk over and get the people running the mainframe to extract or input nformation for you.
It was like an oracle.
Then, thanks to the PC and the nternet, e-mail, the laptop, the browser, and the client server, I could ac ess from my own screen all sorts of data and information being stored on he network.
In this era you were delinked from the office and could ork at home, at the beach house, or in a hotel.
Now we are in Global zation 3.0, where, thanks to digitization, miniaturization, virtualization, ersonalization, and wireless, I can be processing, collecting, or trans- HE TEN FORCES THAT FLATTENED THE WORLD itting voice or data from anywhere to anywhere as an individual or as  machine.
Your desk goes with you everywhere you are now," said Cohen.
And he more people have the ability to push and pull information from any here to anywhere faster, the more barriers to competition and commu ication disappear.
All of a sudden, my business has phenomenal istribution.
I don't care whether you are in Bangalore or Bangor, I can get o you and you can get to me.
More and more, people now want and ex ect wireless mobility to be there, just like electricity.
We are rapidly mov ng into the age of the "mobile me," said Padmasree Warrior, the chief echnology officer of Motorola.
If consumers are paying for any form of ontent, whether it is information, entertainment, data, games, or stock uotes, they increasingly want to be able to access it anytime, anywhere.
ight now consumers are caught in a maze of wireless technology of erings and standards that are still not totally interoperable.
As we all now, some wireless technology works in one neighborhood, state, or ountry and not in another.
he "mobile me" revolution will be complete when you can move eamlessly around the town, the country, or the world with whatever de ice you want.
The technology is getting there.
When this is fully dif used, the "mobile me" will have its full flattening effect, by freeing eople to truly be able to work and communicate from anywhere to any here with anything.
got a taste of what is coming by spending a morning at the Tokyo head uarters of NTT DoCoMo, the Japanese cellular giant that is at the cutting dge of this process and far ahead of America in offering total interoper bility inside Japan.
DoCoMo is an abbreviation for Do Communications ver the Mobile Network; it also means "anywhere" in Japanese.
My ay at DoCoMo's headquarters started with a tour conducted by a robot, hich bowed in perfect Japanese fashion and then gave me a spin round DoCoMo's showroom, which now features handheld video cell hones so you can see the person you are speaking with.
Young people are using our mobile phones today as two-way video hones," explained Tamon Mitsuishi, senior VP of the Ubiquitous Busi ess Department at DoCoMo.
"Everyone takes out their phones, they  H E W O R L D IS F L A T tart dialing each other and have visual conversations.
Of course there re some people who prefer not to see each other's faces."
Thanks to oCoMo technology, if you don't want to show your face you can sub titute a cartoon character for yourself and manipulate the keyboard so hat it not only will speak for you but also will get angry for you and get appy for you.
"So this is a mobile phone, and video camera, but it has lso evolved to the extent that it has functions similar to a PC," he added.
You need to move your buttons quickly [with your thumb].
We call our elves 'the thumb people.'
Young girls in high school can now move their humbs faster than they can type on a PC."
y the way, I asked, what does the "Ubiquitous Department" do?
Now that we have seen the spread of the Internet around the orld," answered Mitsuishi, "what we believe we have to offer is the ext step.
Internet communication until today has been mostly between ndividuals e-mail and other information.
But what we are already tarting to see is communication between individuals and machines nd between machines.
We are moving into that kind of phenomenon, ecause people want to lead a richer lifestyle, and businesses want more fficient practices...
So young people in their business life use PCs in he offices, but in their private time they base their lifestyles on a mobile hone.
There is now a growing movement to allow payment by mobile hone.
[With] a smart card you will be able to make payments in vir ual shops and smart shops.
So next to the cash register there will be a eader of the card, and you just scan your phone and it becomes your redit card too .
We believe that the mobile phone will become the essential con roller of a person's life," added Mitsuishi, oblivious of the double mean ng of the English word "control."
"For example, in the medical field it ill be your authentication system and you can examine your medical ecords, and to make payments you will have to hold a mobile phone.
ou will not be able to lead a life without a mobile phone, and it will ontrol things at home too.
We believe that we need to expand the range f machines that can be controlled by mobile phone."
here is plenty to worry about in this future, from kids being lured by  H E T E N F O R C E S THAT F L A T T E N E D T H E W O R L D nline sexual predators through their cell phones, to employees spending oo much time playing mindless phone games, to people using their phone ameras for all sorts of illicit activities.
Some Japanese were going into ookstores, pulling down cookbooks, and taking pictures of the recipes and hen walking out.
Fortunately, camera phones are now being enabled to ake a noise when they shoot a picture, so that a store owner, or the per on standing next to you in the locker room, will know if he is on Candid amera.
Because your Internet-enabled camera phone is not just a cam ra; it is also a copy machine, with worldwide distribution potential.
oCoMo is now working with other Japanese companies on an rrangement by which you may be walking down the street and see a oster of a concert by Madonna in Tokyo.
The poster will have a bar code nd you can buy your tickets by just scanning the bar code.
Another poster ight be for a new Madonna CD.
Just scan the bar code with your cell hone and it will give you a sample of the songs.
If you like them, scan it gain and you can buy the whole album and have it home-delivered.
No onder my New York Times colleague in Japan, Todd Zaun, who is mar ied to a Japanese woman, remarked to me that there is so much infor ation the Japanese can now access from their Internet-enabled wireless hones that "when I am with my Japanese relatives and someone has a uestion, the first thing they do is reach for the phone."
'm exhausted just writing about all this.
But it is hard to exaggerate ow much this tenth flattenerthe steroids is going to amplify and fur her empower all the other forms of collaboration.
These steroids should ake uploading that much more open, because they will enable more ndividuals to collaborate with one another in more ways and from more laces than ever before.
They will enhance outsourcing, because they ill make it so much easier for a single department of any company to ollaborate with another company.
They will enhance supply-chaining, ecause headquarters will be able to be connected in real time with ev ry individual employee stocking the shelves, every individual package, nd every Chinese factory manufacturing the stuff inside those pack ges.
They will enhance insourcinghaving a company like UPS come eep inside a retailer and manage its whole supply chain, using drivers  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ho can interact with its warehouses, and with every customer, carrying is own PDA.
And most obviously, they will enhance in-forming he ability to manage your own knowledge supply chain.
ir John Rose, the chief executive of Rolls-Royce, gave me a wonder ul example of how wireless and other steroids are enhancing RollsRoyce's ability to do work flow and other new forms of collaboration with ts customers.
Let's say you are British Airways and you are flying a oeing 777 across the Atlantic.
Somewhere over Greenland, one of your olls-Royce engines gets hit with lightning.
The passengers and pilots ight be worried, but there is no need.
Rolls-Royce is on the case.
That olls-Royce engine is connected by transponder to a satellite and is eaming data about its condition and performance, at all times, down nto a computer in Rolls-Royce's operations room.
That is true of many olls-Royce airplane engines in operation.
Thanks to the artificial intel igence in the Rolls-Royce computer, based on complex algorithms, it an track anomalies in its engines while they are in operation.
That rtificial intelligence system knows that this engine was probably hit y lightning, and it immediately feeds out a report to a Rolls-Royce ngineer.
With the real-time data we receive via satellites, we can identify an event' and our engineers can make remote diagnoses," said Rose.
"Under ormal circumstances, after an engine gets hit by lightning you would ave to land the plane, call in an engineer, do a visual inspection, and ake a decision about how much damage might have been done and hether the plane has to be delayed in order to do a repair.
But remember, these airlines do not have much turnaround time.
If his plane is delayed, you throw off the crews, you drop out of your posi ion to fly back home.
It gets very costly.
We can monitor and analyze en ine performance automatically in real time, with our engineers making ecisions about exactly what is needed by the time the plane has landed.
nd if we can determine by all the information we have about the engine hat no intervention or even inspection is needed, the airplane can re urn on schedule, and that saves our customers time and money."
s a result of these steroids, engines can now talk to computers,  H E T E N F O R C E S THAT F L A T T E N E D T H E W O R L D eople can talk to people, computers can talk to computers, and people an talk to computers farther, faster, more cheaply, and more easily than ver before.
And as that has happened, more people from more places ave started asking one another the same two questions: Can you hear e now?
Can we work together now?
HREE he Triple Convergence  at is the triple convergence?
In order to explain what I ean, let me tell a personal story and share one of my fa orite television commercials.
he story took place in March 2004.
I had made plans to fly from altimore to Hartford on Southwest Airlines to visit my daughter Orly, ho was going to school in New Haven, Connecticut.
Being a techsawy guy, I didn't bother with a paper ticket but ordered an e-ticket hrough American Express.
As anyone who flies regularly on South est knows, the cheapo airline has no reserved seats.
When you check n, your ticket says simply A, B, or C, with the As boarding first, the Bs oarding second, and the Cs boarding last.
As veterans of Southwest lso know, you do not want to be a C. In fact, you don't even want to be  B if you want to be sure that you will have room above the seat to stuff he spring clothes you are carrying for your daughter and not get stuck n a middle seat.
If you want to sit in a window or aisle seat and be able o store your bags, you want to be an A on Southwest Airlines.
So, even hough I had ordered an e-ticket, I got up early to make sure I got to the altimore airport ninety-five minutes before my scheduled departure  ecause I was going to be an A. I walked up to the Southwest e-ticket achine, stuck in my credit card, and used the touch screen to get my icketa thoroughly modern man, right?
Well, out came the ticket nd it said B.  was fuming.
"How in the world could I be a B?"
I said to myself, ooking at my watch.
"There is no way that many people got here before HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E e. This thing is rigged!
This is fixed!
This is nothing more than a slot achine!"
stomped off, went through security, bought myself a Cinnabon, and lumly sat at the back of the B line, waiting to be herded on board, so I ould hunt for space in the overhead bins.
Forty minutes later, the flight as called.
From the B line, I enviously watched all the As file on board head of me, with a certain barely detectable air of superiority.
nd then I saw it.
any of the people in the A line didn't have normal tickets like mine.
hey were carrying what looked to me like crumpled pieces of white ome printer paper, but those pieces of paper weren't blank.
They had oarding passes and bar codes printed on them, as i f .
as i f .
as i f .
all he As had downloaded their boarding passes off the Web at home and rinted them out on their home printers.
Which, I quickly learned, was ex ctly what they had done!
I didn't know it, but Southwest had recently an ounced that beginning at 12:01 a.m. the day of a flight, youthe ndividualcould download your own ticket at home, print it out, and hen just have the bar code scanned by the gate agent before you boarded.
Friedman," I said to myself, looking at this scene, "you are so wentieth-century .
You are so Globalization 2.0."
Think about it: In lobalization 1.0, there was a ticket agenta living, breathing person.
used to have to go to the airline office in downtown Washington, .C., take a number, wait in line, and then come face-to-face with a icket agent in order to negotiate my flight arrangements.
In Global zation 2.0, the e-ticket machine replaced the ticket agent.
We thought hat was pretty cool.
And that was just a couple of years ago.
But while ou were sleeping, we entered Globalization 3.0, and now youthe ndividual became your own ticket agent.
Or, to look at it another ay, you, the individual, became an employee of Southwest Airlines.
r, to look at it still another way: If you happen to value your own time taying up past midnight the night before a flight to do your own tick ting, you, the individual, are paying Southwest Airlines to be their mployee!
H E W O R L D IS F L A T  e television commercial is from Konica Minolta Business Tech ologies for a new multipurpose device it sells called bizhub, a iece of office machinery that allows you to do black-and-white or color rinting, copy a document, fax it, scan it, scan it to e-mail, or Internet-fax tall from the same machine.
The commercial begins with a rapid cut ing back and forth between two guys, one in his office and the other tanding at the bizhub machine.
They are close enough to talk by raising heir voices.
Dom is senior in authority but slow on the uptakethe kind f guy who hasn't kept up with changing technology (my kind of guy!).
e can see Ted standing at the bizhub machine when he leans back in is chair and peers out his office doorway.
om: (At his desk) Hey, I need that chart.
ed: (At the bizhub) I'm e-mailing it now.
om: You're e-mailing from the copy machine?
ed: No, I'm e-mailing from bizhub.
om: Bizhub?
Wait, did you make my copies yet?
ed: Right after I scan this.
om: You're scanning at an e-mail machine?
ed: E-mail machine?
I'm at the bizhub machine.
om: (Bewildered) Copying?
ed: (Trying to be patient) E-mailing, then scanning, then copying.
om: (Long pause) Bizhub?
O: (Over an animated graphic of bizhub illustrating its multiple unctions) Amazing versatility and affordable color.
That's biz ub, from Konica Minolta.
Cut to Dom alone at the bizhub machine, trying to see if it will lso dispense coffee into his mug.)
outhwest was able to offer its at-home ticketing, and Konica Minolta ould offer bizhub, because of what I call the triple convergence.
What re the components of this triple convergence?
The short answer is this: irst, right around the year 2000, all ten of the flatteners discussed in the revious chapter started to converge and work together in ways that cre ted a new, flatter, global playing field.
As this new playing field became HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E stablished, both businesses and individuals began to adopt new habits, kills, and processes to get the most out of it.
They moved from largely ertical means of creating value to more horizontal ones.
The merger of his new playing field for doing business with the new ways of doing busi ess was the second convergence, and it actually helped to flatten the orld even further.
Finally, just when all of this flattening was happening,  whole new group of people, several billion, in fact, walked out onto the laying field from China, India, and the former Soviet Empire.
Thanks to he new flat world, and its new tools, some of them were quickly able to lug and play, compete, connect, and collaborate with your kids and ine, more directly, cheaply, and powerfully than ever.
This was the hird convergence.
Now let's look at each in detail.
ONVERGENCE I  l ten flatteners discussed in the previous chapter have been around, e know, since the 1990s, if not earlier.
But they had to spread and ake root and connect with one another to work their magic on the orld.
For instance, at some point around 2003, Southwest Airlines real zed that there were enough PCs around, enough bandwidth, enough omputer storage, enough Internet-comfortable customers, and enough oftware know-how for Southwest to create a work flow system that em owered its customers to download and print out their own boarding asses at home, as easily as downloading a piece of e-mail.
Southwest ould collaborate with its customers and they with Southwest in a new ay.
And somewhere around the same time, the work flow software and ardware converged in a way that enabled Konica Minolta to offer scan ing, e-mailing, printing, faxing, and copying all from the same machine.
his is the first convergence.
s Stanford University economist Paul Romer pointed out, economists ave known for a long time that "there are goods that are complemen arywhereby good A is a lot more valuable if you also have good B.
It was ood to have paper and then it was good to have pencils, and soon as you  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ot more of one you got more of the other, and as you got a better quality f one and better quality of the other, your productivity improved.
This is nown as the simultaneous improvement of complementary goods."
t is my contention that the fall of the Berlin Wall, the rise of the PC, etscape, work flow, outsourcing, offshoring, uploading, insourcing, upply-chaining, in-forming, and the steroids reinforced one another, ike complementary goods.
These flattening forces needed time to start o work together in a mutually enhancing fashion.
That tipping point as reached sometime around the year 2000, when the ten flatteners onverged on such a scale and with such intensity that millions of people n different continents suddenly started to feel that something.
omething... was new.
They couldn't always quite describe what as happening, but by 2000 they sensed that they were in touch with eople they'd never been in touch with before, were being challenged y people who had never challenged them before, were competing with eople with whom they had never competed before, were collaborating ith people with whom they had never collaborated before, and were oing things as individuals they had never dreamt of doing before.
hat they were feeling was the flattening of the world.
he convergence of the ten flatteners had created a whole new platform.
t is a global, Web-enabled platform for multiple forms of collaboration.
his platform enables individuals, groups, companies, and universities any here in the world to collaboratefor the purposes of innovation, produc ion, education, research, entertainment, and, alas, war-makinglike no reative platform ever before.
This platform now operates without regard to eography, distance, time, and, in the near future, even language.
Going orward, this platform is going to be at the center of everything.
Wealth and ower will increasingly accrue to those countries, companies, individuals, niversities, and groups who get three basic things right: the infrastructure o connect with this flat-world platform, the education to get more of their eople innovating on, working off of, and tapping into this platform, and, inally, the governance to get the best out of this platform and cushion its orst side effects.
o, not everyone has access yet to this new platform, this new playing ield.
No, when I say the world is being flattened, I don't mean we are all HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E ecoming equal.
What I do mean is that more people in more places now ave the power to access the flat-world platformto connect, compete, col aborate, and, unfortunately, destroythan ever before.
fter this book came out, Kevin Kelly, one of the founders of Wired agazine, wrote an essay marking the tenth anniversary of the Netscape PO, in which he too concluded, in his own way, that this platform (what e calls "The Machine") for multiple forms of collaboration was indeed the tart of something very, very new and very, very big.
As he put it in the ugust 2005 issue of Wired: "Three thousand years from now, when keen inds review the past, I believe that our ancient time, here at the cusp of he third millennium, will be seen as [the start of a major new historical poch].
In the years roughly coincidental with the Netscape IPO, humans egan animating inert objects with tiny slivers of intelligence, connecting hem into a global field, and inkingMobile, heir own minds into a single thing.
igital, his will be recognized as Personal, he largest, and ostVirtual omplex, and most surprising vent on the planet.
Weaving nerves out of glass and radio waves, our pecies began wiring up all regions, all processes, all facts and notions into  grand network.
From this embryonic neural net was bom a collaborative nterface for our civilization."
ONVERGENCE II  atformsthe basic underlying operating systems for innovation and roductiondo not change very often.
And introducing a new tech ology, or platform like the flat world, alone is never enough to boost pro uctivity.
The big spurts in productivity come when a new technology, or  new platform of technologies, is combined with new ways of doing busi ess, and this always takes time.
It takes time for all the flanking tech ologies, and the business processes and habits needed to get the most out f them, to converge and create that next productivity breakthrough.
WalMart got big productivity boosts when it combined big-box storeswhere eople could buy soap supplies for six monthswith new, horizontal upply-chain management systems that allowed Wal-Mart instantly to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T onnect what a consumer took off the shelf from a Wal-Mart in Kansas ity with what a Wal-Mart supplier in coastal China could produce.
We re now just at the beginning of a massive, worldwide change in habits, s more people get access to this platform and learn how to use it.
It is a rocess that I like to call "horizontalization," and it is the second big con ergence that is taking place today to make the world flat.
Here is what  mean.
hen computers were first introduced into offices, everyone ex ected a big boost in productivity.
But that did not happen right away, and t sparked both disappointment and a little confusion.
The noted econo ist Robert Solow quipped that computers are everywhereexcept "in he productivity statistics."
n a pathbreaking 1989 essay, "Computer and Dynamo: The odern Productivity Paradox in a Not-Too Distant Mirror," the eco omic historian Paul A. David explained such a lag by pointing to a his orical precedent.
He noted that while the lightbulb was invented in 879, it took several decades for electrification to kick in and have a big conomic and productivity impact.
Why?
Because it was not enough just o install electric motors and scrap the old technologysteam engines.
he whole way of doing manufacturing had to be reconfigured.
In the ase of electricity, David pointed out, the key breakthrough was in how uildings, and assembly lines, were redesigned and managed.
Factories n the steam age tended to be heavy, costly multistory buildings designed o brace the weighty belts and other big transmission devices needed to rive steam-powered systems.
Once small, powerful electric motors were ntroduced, everyone hoped for a quick productivity boost.
It took time, hough.
To get all the savings, you needed to redesign enough buildings.
ou needed to have long, low, cheaper-to-build single-story factories, ith small electric motors powering machines of all sizes.
Only when here was a critical mass of experienced factory architects and electrical ngineers and managers, who understood the complementarities among he electric motor, the redesign of the factory, and the redesign of the roduction line, did electrification really deliver the productivity break hrough in manufacturing, David wrote.
he same thing is happening today with the flattening of the world.
HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE any of the ten flatteners have been around for years.
But for the full lattening effects to be felt, we needed not only the ten flatteners to con erge but also something else.
We needed the emergence of a large cadre f managers, innovators, business consultants, business schools, design rs, IT specialists, CEOs, and workers to get comfortable with, and de elop, the sorts of horizontal collaboration and value-creation processes nd habits that could take advantage of this new, flatter playing field.
In hort, the convergence of the ten flatteners begat the convergence of a set f business practices and skills that would get the most out of the flat orld.
And then the two began to mutually reinforce each other.
When people asked, 'Why didn't the IT revolution lead to more pro uctivity right away?'
it was because you needed more than just new omputers," said Romer.
"You needed new business processes and new ypes of skills to go with them.
The new way of doing things makes the nformation technologies more valuable, and the new and better infor ation technologies make the new ways of doing things more possible."
lobalization 2.0 was really the era of mainframe computing, which as very vertical  command-and-control oriented, with companies and heir individual departments tending to be organized in vertical silos.
lobalization 3.0, which is built around the convergence of the ten flat eners, and particularly the combination of the PC, the microprocessor, he Internet, and fiber optics, flipped the playing field from largely topdown to more side to side.
And this naturally fostered and demanded ew business practices, which were less about command and control nd more about connecting and collaborating horizontally.
We have gone from a vertical chain of command for value creation to  much more horizontal chain of command for value creation," explained arly Fiorina.
Innovations in companies like HP, she said, now come more nd more often from horizontal collaboration among different departments nd teams spread all across the globe.
For instance, HP, Cisco, and Nokia ollaborated on the development of a camera/cell phone that beams its dig tized pictures to an HP printer, which quickly prints them out.
Each com any had developed a very sophisticated technological specialty, but it ould add value only when its specialty was horizontally combined with he specialties of the other two companies.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T How you collaborate horizontally and manage horizontally requires  totally different set of skills" from traditional top-down approaches, iorina added.
et me offer just a few examples.
In the past five years, HP has gone rom a company that had eighty-seven different supply chainseach man ged vertically and independently, with its own hierarchy of managers and ack-office supportto a company with just five supply chains that man ge $50 billion in business, and where functions like accounting, billing, nd human resources are handled through a companywide system.
outhwest Airlines took advantage of the convergence of the ten flatten rs to create a system where its customers could download their boarding asses at home.
Or, to put it differently, Southwest Airlines understood that he world was flat and that it could interface differently with its customers, nd vice versa, to improve its productivity and lower its costs.
But until I per onally altered my ticket-buying habits and reengineered myself to collabo ate horizontally with Southwest, this technological breakthrough didn't roduce a productivity breakthrough for me.
So I did start to horizontalize yself.
I realized I could download and print out my own boarding pass nd bar code and arrive at the Baltimore airport sixty-five minutes before y flight, instead of ninety-five minutes.
And when I did, I would capture hirty minutes of productivity for myself.
That is a lot of work time.
What he bizhub commercial is about is the difference between the employee ho understands the convergent technologies in the new bizhub machine and how to get the most out of them) and the employee in the very same ffice who does not.
Not until the latter changes his work habits will pro uctivity in that fictional office go up, even though the office has this mazing new machine.
inally, consider the example of WPPthe second-largest advertisingmarketing-communications consortium in the world.
WPP, which is based n England, did not exist as we now know it twenty years ago.
It is a product f the consolidation of some of the biggest names in the businessfrom oung & Rubicam to Ogilvy & Mather to Hill & Knowlton.
The alliance as put together to capture more and more of big clients' marketing needs, uch as advertising, direct mail, media buying, and branding.
For years the big challenge for WPP was how to get its own compa- HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE ies to collaborate/' said Allen Adamson, managing director of WPP's randing firm, Landor Associates.
"Now, though, it is often no longer nough just to get the companies in WPP to work together per se.
In reasingly, we find ourselves pulling together individuals from within ach of these companies to form a customized collaborative team just for ne client.
The solution that will create value for that client did not exist n any one company or even in the traditional integration of the compa ies.
It had to be much more specifically tailored.
So we had to go down nside the whole group and pluck the individual who is the right ad per on, to work with the right branding person, to work with the right media erson for this particular client."
hen GE decided in 2003 to spin off its insurance businesses into a eparate company, WPP assembled a customized team to handle every hing from the naming of the new companyGenworthall the way own to itsfirstadvertising campaign and direct-marketing program.
"As  leader within this organization," said Adamson, "what you have to do is igure out the value proposition that is needed for each client and then dentify and assemble the individual talents within WPP's workforce that ill in effect form a virtual company just for that client.
In the case of E, we even gave a name to the virtual collaborative team we formed: lamath Communications."
hen the world went flat, WPP adapted itself to get the most out of tself.
It changed its office architecture and practicesbasically tearing own its walls and silos just like those companies that adjusted the ar hitecture of their steam-run factories to the electric motor.
By opening tself up this way, WPP actually unlocked so much more energy and in elligence.
Suddenly, it could look at all its employees from all its com anies as a vast pool of individual specialists, who could be assembled orizontally into any number of collaborative teams, depending on the nique demands of any given project.
And that team would then be ome a de facto new company with its own name.
hinking horizontally applies to everything from business to education o military planning.
It takes an adjustment to move from vertical to hori ontal thinking, as WPP did.
Because vertical thinking often requires you o start by asking who controls what system, not what is the outcome or  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ffect you want to create.
Let's see, if I am a general in Iraq, the effect I ant to create is to get better real-time battlefield intelligence.
Okay, well, f that is the case, then my top priority is not whether I control the drone hat flies over the battlefield space and takes the aerial photos.
No, my top riority is finding a way to get the pictures that this drone is sending back nalyzed as deeply and quickly as possible.
When that is my priority, then  start thinking horizontally.
I start thinking about how I can use the flatworld platformthat is, how I can use my own network or network of net orksto take the streaming video coming off that drone and feed it, live, o flat-screen TVs in the CIA, the DIA, the NSA, army intelligence, and ir force intelligence, and then integrate each of those analysts into a sin le chat room, so they can type in their responses to what they are seeing nd what sort of threat it poses, as the video is streaming, and that chat will ome up alongside the screen, so we all can analyze it together.
With that pproach, I have gotten away from vertical thinkingthat I, the air force, ontrol the drone in my silo and therefore my analysts alone must analyze he video and then tell the army in its silo what we have found.
Instead, I m saying that the effect I want to create is to get the smartest analysis in eal time, and the way I get that is by horizontally connecting different odes in my whole network.
Because all of us are smarter than one of us, y priority is not who controls the video but how do I create a horizontal esponse system to extract the most intelligence, from all of us, to under tand what the video is showing.
t will take time for this new playing field and the new business prac ices to be fully aligned.
It's a work in progress.
But here's a little warning: t is happening much faster than you think, and it is happening globally.
emember, this was a triple convergence!
ONVERGENCE III  w so?
Just as we finished creating this new, more horizontal play ng field, and companies and individuals primarily in the West tarted quickly adapting to it, three billion people who had been locked HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E ut of the field suddenly found themselves liberated to plug and play ith everybody else.
ave for a tiny minority, these three billion people had never been llowed to compete and collaborate before, because they lived in largely losed economies with very vertical, hierarchical political and economic tructures.
I am talking about the people of China, India, Russia, Eastern urope, Latin America, and Central Asia.
Their economies and political ystems all opened up during the course of the 1990s, so that their people ere increasingly free to join the free-market game.
And when did these hree billion people converge with the new playing field and the new rocesses?
Right when the field was being flattened, right when millions f them could compete and collaborate more equally, more horizon ally, and with cheaper and more readily available work flow tools than ver before.
Indeed, thanks to the flattening of the world, many of these ew entrants didn't even have to leave home to participate.
Thanks to the en flatteners, the playing field came to them!
t is this triple convergenceof new players, on a new playing field, de eloping new processes and habits for horizontal collaborationthat I be ieve is the most important force shaping global economics and politics in the arly twenty-first century.
Giving so many people access to all these tools of ollaboration, along with the ability through search engines and the Web to ccess billions of pages of raw information, ensures that the next generation f innovations will come from all over Planet Flat.
The scale of the global ommunity that is soon going to be able to participate in all sorts of discov ry and innovation is something the world has simply never seen before.
hroughout the Cold War there were just three major trading locsNorth America, Western Europe, and Japan plus East Asiaand he competition among the three was relatively controlled, since they ere all Cold War allies on the same side of the great global divide.
here were also still a lot of walls around for labor and industries to hide ehind.
The wage rates in these three trading blocs were roughly the ame, the workforces roughly the same size, and the education levels oughly equivalent.
"You had a gentlemanly competition," noted Intel's hairman Craig Barrett.
hen along came the triple convergence.
The Berlin Wall came  H E W O R L D IS F L A T own, the Berlin mall opened up, and suddenly some three billion people ho had been behind walls walked onto the flattened global piazza.
ere's how it looked in round numbers: According to a November 004 study by Harvard University economist Richard B. Freeman, in 985 "the global economic world" consisted of North America, Western urope, Japan, as well as chunks of Latin America, Africa, and the coun ries of East Asia.
The total population of this global economic world, tak ng part in international trade and commerce, said Freeman, was about .5 billion people.
y 2000, as a result of the collapse of communism in the Soviet mpire, India's turn from autarky, China's shift to market capitalism, nd population growth all over, the global economic world expanded to ncompass 6 billion people.
s a result of this widening, another roughly 1.5 billion new workers ntered the global economic labor force, Freeman said, which is almost xactly double the number we would have had in 2000 had China, ndia, and the Soviet Empire not joined.
rue, maybe only 10 percent of this new 1.5 billion-strong workforce ntering the global economy have the education and connectivity to col aborate and compete at a meaningful level.
But that is still 150 million eople, roughly the size of the entire U.S. workforce.
Said Barrett, 'You on't bring three billion people into the world economy overnight with ut huge consequences, especially from three societies [like India, China, nd Russia] with rich educational heritages."
hat is exactly right.
These societies that we are now melding with ave a very high ethic of education.
Consider this story from Education eek, the weekly paper for American schoolteachers.
In its November 30, 005, issue it ran a special report on the Indian middle class and its aspi ations.
The story, datelined Chennai, India, began like this: "In one of hennai's ubiquitous academic-coaching classes, a hundred 12th raders are crammed into a purple room, about 30 feet long and 25 feet ide.
The energy-sapping temperature is well over 100 degrees despite he constant whirr of overhead fans.
On a wooden dais, Muthukrishnan rulselvan draws a triangle on a blackboard, marks angles inside it, and xplains a geometrical formula into a microphone.
The students listen, HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE apt, although it is nearly 10:00 p.m.
When Mr. Arulselvan asks a ques ion, the students rush to reply in a chorus.
When the tutor poses a prob em, they bury their heads in notebooks, chewing on pencils, eager to inish before everyone else.
This intensive, seven-days-a-week class rep esents life as usual for these Indian high schoolers, who are hoping to arn an engineering slot at one of the colleges here in Chennai.
hen they return home, most will gulp down a cup of strong, sweet cof ee to keep them up studying several hours longer .
In India, putting a hild through engineering or medical college is, for many middle-class amilies, a life's mission in a way that is almost unknown in the United tates.
In the country that invented the decimal scale, such long-dead eniuses of mathematics and science as Srinivasa Ramanujam and ryabhatta are still revered, and children who do well in those subjects re considered especially prized."
ccording to the Institute of International Education, India sent ore students to college in the United States in 2004-05 than did any ther country in the world.
According to the HE, 80,466 foreign students nrolled in the United States were from India, followed by 62,523 from hina, and 53,358 from South Korea.
Most of those students are study ng business, engineering, math, or computer science.
India is a long ay away.
It's a very different culture.
It's not easy coming that far.
You ave to be hungry.
ndeed, a lot of those new players from India, China, and the former oviet Empire are not just walking onto the flat-world field with their normous hunger to get ahead by outlearning their competition.
What e are witnessing is a mad dashborn of fifty years of pent-up aspira ions in places like India, China, and the former Soviet Empire, where or five decades young people were educated, but not given an outlet at ome to really fulfill their potential.
Imagine shaking a champagne bot le for fifty years and then finally uncorking it.
You get quite a pop when he cork comes off.
That's the kind of explosion of aspirations coming out f India, China, and the former Soviet Empire today.
You don't want to et in the way of that cork.
nd that is why this is no slow-motion triple convergence.
It's hap ening fast.
Because once the world has been flattened and the new  H E W O R L D IS F L A T orms of collaboration made available to more and more people, the win ers will be those who learn the habits, processes, and skills most uicklyand there is nothing that guarantees it will be Americans or estern Europeans permanently leading the way.
And take note, these ew players are often stepping onto the playing field legacy free, mean ng that many of them were so far behind they can leap right into the ew technologies without having to worry about all the sunken costs of ld systems.
It means that they can move very fast to adopt new, state-ofthe-art technologies, which is why there are already more cell phones in se in China today than there are people in the United States.
Many hinese just skipped over the landline phase.
To put it another way, any Chinese just went from no phones to cell phones in the space of a ecade.
I cotaught a course on globalization at Harvard in the spring of 005.
One day after class, one of my students came up to me and told me his story: He and his Harvard colleagues had formed a student organiza ion with students in China.
They help one another on everything from riting rsums to joint study projects.
The interesting thing, he said, hough, was how they communicate.
They use Skype, with its free voice ver the Internet technology.
But the even more interesting thing he said o me was this: It was the Chinese students who introduced the merican students in the group to Skype.
And most of those Chinese stu ents, he pointed out, didn't come from big cities but from smaller towns round China.
e tend to think of global trade and economics as something driven y the IMF, the G-8, the World Bank, the WTO, and the trade treaties orged by trade ministers.
I don't want to suggest that these governmental gencies are irrelevant.
They are not.
But they are going to become less mportant.
In the future, globalization is going to be increasingly driven y the individuals who understand the flat world, adapt themselves uickly to its processes and technologies, and start to march forward  ithout any treaties or advice from the IMF.
They will be every color of he rainbow and from every corner of the world.
he global economy from here forward will be shaped less by the onderous deliberations of finance ministers and more by the sponta eous explosion of energy from the zippies.
Yes, Americans grew up with HE TRIPLE CONVERGENCE he hippies in the 1960s.
Thanks to the high-tech revolution, many of us ecame yuppies in the 1980s.
Well, now let me introduce the zippies.
The Zippies Are Here," declared the Indian weekly magazine utlook.
Zippies are the huge cohort of Indian youth who are the first to ome of age since India shifted away from socialism and dived headfirst nto global trade and the information revolution by turning itself into the orlds service center.
Outlook called India's zippies "Liberalization's hildren" and defined a zippie as a "young city or suburban resident, be ween 15 and 25 years of age, with a zip in the stride.
Belongs to Gener tion Z.
Can be male or female, studying or working.
Oozes attitude, mbition and aspiration.
Cool, confident and creative.
Seeks challenges, oves risks and shuns fear."
Indian zippies feel no guilt about making oney or spending it.
They are, says one Indian analyst quoted by Outlook, destination driven, not destiny driven, outward looking, not inward, up ardly mobile, not stuck-in-my-station-in-life."
With 54 percent of India nder the age of twenty-fivethat's 555 million peoplesix out of ten ndian households have at least one potential zippie.
And the zippies don't ust have a pent-up demand for good jobs; they want the good life.
t all happened so fast.
P. V. Kannan, the C E O and cofounder of the ndian call-center company 24/7 Customer, told me that in the last ecade, he went from sweating out whether he would ever get a chance o work in America to becoming one of the leading figures in the out ourcing of services from America to the rest of the world.
I will never forget when I applied for a visa to come to the United tates," Kannan recalled.
"It was March 1991.1 had gotten a B.A.
in char ered accountancy from the [Indian] Institute of Chartered Accountants.
was twenty-three, and my girlfriend was twenty-five.
She was also a hartered accountant.
I had graduated at age twenty and had been work ng for the Tata Consultancy group.
So was my girlfriend.
And we both ot job offers through a body shop [a recruiting firm specializing in im orting Indian talent for companies in America] to work as programmers or IBM.
So we went to the U.S. consulate in Bombay.
The recruiting ervice was based in Bombay.
In those days, there was always a very long ine to get visas to the United States, and there were people who would ctually sleep in the line and hold places and you could go buy their  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lace for 20 rupees.
But we went by ourselves and stood in line and we inally got in to see the man who did the interview.
He was an American consular official].
His job was to ask questions and try to figure out hether we were going to do the work and then come back to India or try o stay in America.
They judge by some secret formula.
We used to call t 'the lottery'you went and stood in line and it was a life lottery, be ause everything was dependent on it."
here were actually books and seminars in India devoted entirely to he subject of how to prepare for a work visa interview at the U.S. embassy.
t was the only way for skilled Indian engineers really to exploit their tal nt.
"I remember one tip was to always go professionally dressed," said annan, "so [my girlfriend and I] were both in our best clothes.
After the nterview is over, the man doesn't tell you anything.
You had to wait until he evening to know the results.
But meanwhile, the whole day was hell.
o distract our minds, we just walked the streets of Bombay and went hopping.
We would go back and forth, 'What if I get in and you don't?
hat if you get in and I don't?'
I can't tell you how anxious we were, be ause so much was riding on it.
It was torture.
So in the evening we go ack and both of us got visas, but I got afive-yearmultiple entry and my irlfriend got a six-month visa.
She was crying.
She did not understand hat it meant.
'I can only stay for six months?'
I tried to explain to her that ou just need to get in and then everything can be worked out."
hile many Indians still want to come to America to work and study, hanks to the triple convergence many of them can now compete at the ighest levels, and be decently paid, by staying at home.
In a flat world, ou can innovate without having to emigrate.
Said Kannan, "My daughter ill never have to sweat that out."
In a flat world, he explained, "there is no ne visa officer who can keep you out of the system .
It's a plug-and-play orld."
Because you can now innovate without having to emigrate, more nd more world-class innovation, particularly in software, is now starting rom Indianot just being worked on from India.
This is both keeping ndians at home and attracting others.
P. Anandan, an Indian-American omputer engineer who worked for Microsoft in Redmond, returned to ndia in 2005 to open Microsoft's research center in Bangalore.
"I have wo non-Indians working for me here, one Japanese and one American, HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE nd they could work anywhere in the world," Anandan told me.
He added hat when he got his engineering degree in India twenty-eight years ago, ll the competition was to get a job abroad.
Now the fiercest competition s to get an IT job in India: "It is no longer, 'Well I have to stay here,' but, Do I get a chance to stay here?'"
ne of the most dynamic young pluggers and players I met in India as Rajesh Rao, founder and C E O of Dhruva Interactive, a small game ompany based in Bangalore.
If I could offer you one person who em odies the triple convergence, it is Rajesh.
He and his firm show us what appens when an Indian zippie plugs into the ten flatteners.
hruva is located in a converted house on a quiet street in a residen ial neighborhood of Bangalore.
When I stopped in for a visit, I found two loors of Indian game designers and artists, trained in computer graphics, orking on PCs, drawing various games and animated characters for merican and European clients.
The artists and designers were listening o music on headphones as they worked.
Occasionally, they took a break y playing a group computer game, in which all the designers could try to hase and kill one another at once on their computer screens.
Dhruva has lready produced some very innovative gamesfrom a computer tennis ame you can play on the screen of your cell phone to a computer pool ame you can play on your PC or laptop.
In 2004, it bought the rights to se Charlie Chaplin's image for mobile computer games.
That's right  start-up Indian game company today owns the Chaplin image for use in obile computer games.
n Bangalore and in later e-mail conversations, I asked Rajesh, who is n his mid-thirties, to walk me through how he became a player in the lobal game business from Bangalore.
The first defining moment for me dates back to the early nineties," aid Rajesh, a smallish, mustachioed figure with the ambition of a heavy eight boxer.
"Having lived and worked in Europe, as a student, I was lear in my choice that I would not leave India.
I wanted to do my thing rom India, do something that would be globally respected and some hing that would make a difference in India.
I started my company in angalore as a one-man operation on March 15, 1995.
My father gave e the seed money for the bank loan that bought me a computer and a  H E W O R L D IS F L A T 4.4 kbp modem.
I set out to do multimedia applications aimed at the ducation and industry sectors.
By 1997, we were a five-man team.
We ad done some pathbreaking work in our chosen field, but we realized hat this was not challenging us enough.
End of Dhruva 1.0.
In March 1997, we partnered with Intel and began the process of rein enting ourselves into a gaming company.
By mid-1998, we were showing lobal players what we were capable of by way of both designing games nd developing the outsourced portions of games designed by others.
On ovember 26,1998, we signed our first major game development project ith Infogrames Entertainment, a French gaming company.
In hind ight, I think the deal we landed was due to the pragmatism of one man n Infogrames more than anything else.
We did a great job on the game, ut it was never published.
It was a big blow for us, but the quality of our ork spoke for itself, so we survived.
The most important lesson we earned: We could do it, but we had to get smart.
Going for all or noth ngthat is, signing up to make only a full game or nothing at allwas ot sustainable.
We had to look at positioning ourselves differently.
End f Dhruva 2.0."
his led to the start of Dhruva's 3.0 erapositioning Dhruva as a rovider of game development services.
The computer game business is lready enormous, every year grossing more revenue than Hollywood, nd it already had some tradition of outsourcing game characters to ountries like Canada and Australia.
"In March 2001, we sent out our ew game demo, Saloon, to the world," said Rajesh.
"The theme was the merican Wild Wild West, and the setting was a saloon in a small town fter business hours, with the barman cleaning up .
None of us had ver seen a real saloon before, but we researched the look and feel [of a aloon] using the Internet and Google.
The choice of the theme was de iberate.
We wanted potential clients in the U.S.A. and Europe to be con inced that Indians can 'get it.'
The demo was a hit, it landed us a bunch f outsourced business, and we have been a successful company ever ince."
ould he have done this a decade earlier, before the world got so flat?
Never," said Rajesh.
Several things had to come together.
The first as to have enough installed bandwidth so he could e-mail game con- HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE ent and instructions back and forth between his own company and his merican clients.
The second factor, said Rajesh, was the spread of PCs or use in both business and at home, with people getting very comfort ble using them in a variety of tasks.
"PCs are everywhere," he said.
"The enetration is relatively decent even in India today."
he third factor, though, was the emergence of the work flow software nd Internet applications that made it possible for a Dhruva to go into busi ess as a minimultinational from day one: Word, Outlook, NetMeeting, D Studio MAX.
But Google is the key.
"It's fantastic," said Rajesh.
"One f the things that's always an issue for our clients from the West is, 'Will ou Indians be able to understand the subtle nuances of Western con ent?'
Now, to a large extent, it was a very valid question.
But the Internet as helped us to be able to aggregate different kinds of content at the ouch of a button, and today if someone asks you to make something that ooks like Tom and Jerry, you just say 'Google Tom and Jerry' and you've ot tons and tons of pictures and information and reviews and write-ups bout Tom and Jerry, which you can read and simulate."
hile people were focusing on the boom and bust of the dot-coms, ajesh explained, the real revolution was taking place more quietly.
It was he fact that all over the world, people, en masse, were starting to get com ortable with the new global infrastructure.
"We are just at the beginning f being efficient in using it," he said.
"There is a lot more we can do with his infrastructure, as more and more people shift to becoming paperless n their offices and realize that distances really [do] not matter .
It will upercharge all of this.
It's really going to be a different world."
oreover, in the old days, these software programs would have been riced beyond the means of a little Indian game start-up, but not any ore, thanks in part to the open-source free software movement.
Said ajesh, "The cost of software tools would have remained where the inter sted parties wanted them to be if it was not for the deluge of rather effi ient freeware and shareware products that sprung up in the early 2000s.
icrosoft Windows, Office, 3D Studio MAX, Adobe Photoshopeach f these programs would have been priced higher than they are today if ot for the many freeware/shareware programs that were comparable nd compelling.
The Internet brought to the table the element of choice  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nd instant comparison that did not exist before for a little company like urs .
Already we have in our gaming industry artists and designers orking from home, something unimaginable a few years back, given he fact that developing games is a highly interactive process.
They con ect into the company's internal system over the Internet, using a secure eature called VPN [virtual private network], making their presence no ifferent from the guy in the next cubicle."
he Internet now makes this whole world "like one marketplace," dded Rajesh.
"This infrastructure is not only going to facilitate sourcing f work to the best price, best quality, from the best place, it is also going o enable a great amount of sharing of practices and knowledge, and it's oing to be 'I can learn from you and you can learn from me' like never efore.
It's very good for the world.
The economy is going to drive inte ration, and the integration is going to drive the economy."
here is no reason the United States should not benefit from this rend, Rajesh insisted.
What Dhruva is doing is pioneering computer aming within Indian society.
When the Indian market starts to embrace aming as a mainstream social activity, Dhruva will already be positioned o take advantage.
But by then, he argued, the market "will be so huge hat there will be a lot of opportunity for content to come from outside.
nd, hey, the Americans are way ahead in terms of the ability to know hat games can work and what won't work and in terms of being at the utting edge of designso this is a bilateral thing .
Every perceived dol ar or opportunity that is lost today [from an American point of view be ause of outsourcing] is actually going to come back to you times ten, nce the market here is unleashed .
Just remember, we are a threehundred-million middle class, larger than the size of your country or urope."
es, he noted, India right now has a great advantage in having a pool f educated, low-wage English speakers with a strong service etiquette in heir DNA and an enterprising spirit.
"So, sure, for the moment, we are eading the so-called wave of service outsourcing of various kinds of new hings," said Rajesh.
"But I believe that there should be no doubt that this s just the beginning.
If [Indians] think that they've got something going nd there is something they can keep that's not going to go anywhere, HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E hat will be a big mistake, because we have got Eastern Europe, which is aking up, and we have got China, which is waiting to get on the ser ices bandwagon to do various things.
I mean, you can source the best roduct or service or capacity or competency from anywhere in the orld today, because of this whole infrastructure that is being put into lace.
The only thing that inhibits you from doing that is your readiness o make use of this infrastructure.
So as different businesses, and as dif erent people, get more comfortable using this infrastructure, you are go ng to see a huge explosion.
It is a matter offiveto seven years and we will ave a huge batch of excellent English-speaking Chinese graduates oming out of their universities.
Poles and Hungarians are already very ell connected, very close to Europe, and their cultures are very similar to Western Europe's].
So today India is ahead, but it has to work very ard if it wants to keep this position.
It has to never stop inventing and einventing itself."
he raw ambition that Rajesh and so many of his generation possess s worthy of note by Americansa point I elaborate on later.
We can't relax," said Rajesh.
"I think in the case of the United States hat is what happened a bit.
Please look at me: I am from India.
We have een at a very different level before in terms of technology and business.
ut once we saw we had an infrastructure which made the world a small lace, we promptly tried to make the best use of it.
We saw there were so any things we could do.
We went ahead, and today what we are seeing s a result of t h a t .
There is no time to rest.
That is gone.
There are ozens of people who are doing the same thing you are doing, and they re trying to do it better.
It is like water in a tray, you shake it and it will ind the path of least resistance.
That is what is going to happen to so any jobsthey will go to that corner of the world where there is the east resistance and the most opportunity.
If there is a skilled person in imbuktu, he will get work if he knows how to access the rest of the orld, which is quite easy today.
You can make a Web site and have an -mail address and you are up and running.
And if you are able to emonstrate your work, using the same infrastructure, and if people are omfortable giving work to you, and if you are diligent and clean in your ransactions, then you are in business."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T nstead of complaining about outsourcing, said Rajesh, Americans nd Western Europeans would "be better off thinking about how you an raise your bar and raise yourselves into doing something better.
mericans have consistently led in innovation over the last century.
mericans whiningwe have never seen that before.
People like me ave learned a lot from Americans.
We have learned to become a little ore aggressive in the way we market ourselves, which is something we ould not have done given our typical British background."
o what is your overall message?
I asked Rajesh, before leaving with y head spinning.
My message is that what's happening now is just the tip of the ice erg .
What is really necessary is for everybody to wake up to the fact hat there is a fundamental shift that is happening in the way people are oing to do business.
And everyone is going to have to improve them elves and be able to compete.
It is just going to be one global market.
ook, we just made [baseball] caps for Dhruva to give away.
They came rom Sri Lanka."
ot from a factory in South Bangalore?
I asked.
Not from South Bangalore," said Rajesh, "even though Bangalore is ne of the export hubs for garments.
Among the three or four caps we got uotations for, this [Sri Lankan one] was the best in terms of quality and he right price, and we thought the finish was great.
This is the situation you are going to see moving forward," Rajesh oncluded.
"If you are seeing all this energy coming out of Indians, it's ecause we have been underdogs and we have that drive to kind of chieve and to get there .
India is going to be a superpower and we are oing to rule."
ule whom?
I asked.
ajesh laughed at his own choice of words.
"It's not about ruling any ody.
That's the point.
There is nobody to rule anymore.
It's about how ou can create a great opportunity for yourself and hold on to that or eep creating new opportunities where you can thrive.
I think today that ule is about efficiency, it's about collaboration and it is about competi iveness and it is about being a player.
It is about staying sharp and being n the game .
The world is a football field now and you've got to be HE RIPLE CONVERGENCE harp to be on the team which plays on that field.
If you're not good nough, you're going to be sitting and watching the game.
That's all."
ow Do Y O U SAY " Z I P P I E " I N C H I N E S E ?
in Bangalore ten years ago, the best place to meet zippies in Beijing oday is in the line at the consular section of the U.S. embassy.
In eijing in the summer of 2004,1 discovered that the quest by Chinese stu ents for visas to study or work in America was so intense that it had pawned dedicated Internet chat rooms, where Chinese students swapped tories about which arguments worked best with which U.S. embassy con ular officials.
They even gave the U.S. diplomats names like "Amazon oddess," "Too Tall Baldy," and "Handsome Guy."
Just how intensely hinese students strategize over the Internet was revealed, U.S. embassy fficials told me, when one day a rookie U.S. consular official had stu ent after student come before him with the same line that some chat oom had suggested would work for getting a visa: "I want to go to merica to become a famous professor."
fter hearing this all day, the U.S. official was suddenly surprised to et one student who came before him and pronounced, "My mother has n artificial limb and I want to go to America to learn how to build a bet er artificial limb for her."
The official was so relieved to hear a new line hat he told the young man, "You know, this is the best story I've heard all ay.
I really salute you.
I'm going to give you a visa."
ou guessed it.
he next day, a bunch of students showed up at the embassy saying hey wanted a visa to go to America to learn how to build better artificial imbs for their mothers.
alking to these U.S. embassy officials in Beijing, who are the gate eepers for these visas, it quickly became apparent to me that they had ixed feelings about the process.
On the one hand, they were pleased hat so many Chinese wanted to come study and work in America.
On he other hand, they wanted to warn American kids: Do you realize what  H E W O R L D IS F L A T s coming your way?
As one U.S. embassy official in Beijing said to me, What I see happening [in China] is what has been going on for the last everal decades in the rest of Asiathe tech booms, the tremendous en rgy of the people.
I saw it elsewhere, but now it is happening here."
was visiting Yale in the spring of 2004.
As I was strolling through the entral quad, near the statue of Elihu Yale, two Chinese-speaking tours ame through, with Chinese tourists of all ages.
The Chinese have started o tour the world in large numbers, and as China continues to develop oward a more open society, it is quite likely that Chinese leisure tourists ill alter the whole world-tourism industry.
ut the Chinese are not visiting Yale just to admire the ivy.
Consider hese statistics from Yale's admissions office.
The fall 1985 class had 71 raduate and undergraduate students from China and 1 from the Soviet nion.
The fall 2003 class had 297 Chinese graduate and undergraduate tudents and 23 Russians.
Yale's total international student contingent ent from 836 in the fall of 1985 to 1,775 in the fall of 2003.
Applications rom Chinese and Russian high school students to attend Yale as under raduates have gone from a total of 40 Chinese for the class of 2001 to 76 for the class of 2008, and from 18 Russians for the class of 2001 to 30 or the class of 2008.
In 1999, Yiting Liu, a schoolgirl from Chengdu, hina, got accepted to Harvard on a full scholarship.
Her parents then rote a build-your-own handbook about how they managed to prepare heir daughter to get accepted to Harvard.
The book, in Chinese, titled arvard Girl Yiting Liu, offered "scientifically proven methods" to get our Chinese kid into Harvard.
The book became a runaway bestseller n China.
By 2003 it had sold some three million copies and spawned ore than a dozen copycat books about how to get your kid into olumbia, Oxford, or Cambridge.
hile many Chinese aspire to go to Harvard and Yale, they aren't ust waiting around to get into an American university.
They are also try ng to build their own at home.
In 2004,1 was a speaker for the 150th an iversary of Washington University in St. Louis, a school noted for its trength in science and engineering.
Mark Wrighton, the university's houghtful chancellor, and I were chatting before the ceremony.
He entioned in passing that in the spring of 2001 he had been invited HE TRIPLE ONVERGENCE along with many other foreign and American academic leaders) to singhua University in Beijing, one of the finest in China, to participate n the celebration of its ninetieth anniversary.
He said the invitation left im scratching his head at first: Why would any university celebrate its inetieth anniversarynot its hundredth?
Perhaps a Chinese tradition?"
Wrighton asked himself.
When he ar ived at Tsinghua, though, he learned the answer.
The Chinese had rought academics from all over the world to Tsinghua more than ten housand people attended the ceremonyin order to make the declara ion "that at the one hundredth anniversary Tsinghua University would e among the world's premier universities," Wrighton later explained to e in an e-mail.
"The event involved all of the leaders of the Chinese overnment, from the Mayor of Beijing to the head of state.
Each ex ressed the conviction that an investment in the university to support its evelopment as one of the world's great universities within ten years ould be a rewarding one.
With Tsinghua University already regarded as ne of the leading universities in China, focused on science and tech ology, it was evident that there is a seriousness of purpose in striving for  world leadership position in [all the areas involved] in spawning tech ological innovation."
nd as a result of China's drive to succeed, Microsoft chairman Bill ates argued to me, the "ovarian lottery" has changedas has the whole elationship between geography and talent.
Thirty years ago, he said, if ou had a choice between being born a genius on the outskirts of Bom ay or Shanghai or being born an average person in Poughkeepsie, you ould take Poughkeepsie, because your chances of thriving and living a ecent life there, even with average talent, were much greater.
But as the orld has gone flat, Gates said, and so many people can now plug and lay from anywhere, natural talent has started to trump geography.
Now," he said, "I would rather be a genius born in China than an av rage guy born in Poughkeepsie."
hat's what happens when the Berlin Wall turns into the Berlin mall nd three billion people converge with all these new tools for collabora ion.
"We're going to tap into the energy and talent offivetimes as many eople as we did before," said Gates.
HE ROM RUSSIA W I T H  O R L D IS F L A T OVE idn't get a chance to visit Russia and interview Russian zippies for this ook, but I did the next best thing.
I asked my friend Thomas R. ickering, the former U.S. ambassador to Moscow and now a top inter ational relations executive with Boeing, to explain a new development I ad heard about: that Boeing was using Russian engineers and scientists, ho once worked on MiGs, to help design its next generation of passen er planes.
ickering unraveled the story for me.
Beginning in 1991, Boeing tarted assigning out work to Russian scientists to take advantage of their ex ertise in aerodynamic problems and new aviation alloys.
In 1998, Boeing ecided to take this a step further and open an aeronautical engineering esign office in Moscow.
Boeing located the office in the twelve-story oscow tower that McDonald's built with all the rubles it made from sell ng Big Macs in Moscow before the end of communismmoney that cDonald's had pledged not to take out of the country.
even years later, said Pickering, "we now have eight hundred Russian ngineers and scientists working for us and we're going up to at least one housand and maybe, over time, tofifteenhundred."
The way it works, he ex lained, is that Boeing contracts with different Russian aircraft companies ompanies that were famous in the Cold War for making warplanes, ompanies with names like Ilyushin, Tupolev, and Sukhoiand they pro ide the engineers-to-order for Boeing's different projects.
Using Frenchmade airplane design software, the Russian engineers collaborate with their olleagues at Boeing Americain both Seattle and Wichita, Kansasin omputer-aided airplane designs.
Boeing has set up a twenty-four-hour orkday.
It consists of two shifts in Moscow and one shift in America.
sing fiber-optic cables, advanced compression technologies, and aero autical work flow software, "they just pass their designs back and forth rom Moscow to America," Pickering said.
There are videoconferencing acilities on every floor of Boeing's Moscow office, so the engineers don't ave to rely on e-mail when they have a problem to solve with their merican counterparts.
They can have a face-to-face conversation.
oeing started outsourcing airplane design work to Moscow as an ex- HE TRIPLE CONVERGENCE riment, a sideline; but today, with a shortage of aeronautical engineers n America, it is a necessity.
Boeing's ability to blend these lower-cost ussian engineers with higher-cost, more advanced American design eams is enabling Boeing to compete head-to-head with its archrival, irbus Industries, which is subsidized by a consortium of European gov rnments and is using Russian talent as well.
A U.S. aeronautical engi eer costs $120 per design hour; a Russian costs about one-third of that.
ut the outsourcees are also outsourcers.
The Russian engineers have utsourced elements of their work for Boeing to Hindustan Aeronautics n Bangalore, which specializes in digitizing airplane designs to make hem easier to manufacture.
But this isn't the half of it.
In the old days, xplained Pickering, Boeing would say to its Japanese subcontractors, We will send you the plans for the wings of the 777.
We will let you ake some of them and then we will count on you buying the whole air lanes from us.
It's a win-win."
oday Boeing says to the giant Japanese industrial company Mitsu ishi, "Here are the general parameters for the wings of the new 7E7.
ou design the finished product and build it."
But Japanese engineers are ery expensive.
So what happens?
Mitsubishi outsources elements of the utsourced 7E7 wing to the same Russian engineers Boeing is using for ther parts of the plane.
Meanwhile, some of these Russian engineers nd scientists are leaving the big Russian airplane companies and setting p their own firms, and Boeing is considering buying shares in some of hese start-ups to have reserve engineering capacity.
ll of this global sourcing is for the purpose of designing and building lanes faster and cheaper, so that Boeing can use its cash to keep inno ating for the next generation and survive the withering competition rom Airbus.
Thanks to the triple convergence, it now takes Boeing leven days to build a 737, down from twenty-eight days just a few years go.
Boeing will build its next generation of planes in three days, because ll the parts are being computer-designed for assembly, and Boeing's lobal supply chain will enable it to move parts from one facility to an ther just in time.
o make sure that it is getting the best deals on its parts and other sup lies, Boeing now runs regular "reverse auctions," in which companies HE  O R L D IS F L A T id down against each other rather than bid up against each other.
They id for contracts on everything from toilet paper for the Boeing factories o nuts and boltsthe off-the-shelf commodity partsfor Boeing's supply hain.
Boeing will announce an auction for a stated time on a specially esigned Internet site.
It will begin the auction for each supply item at hat it considers a fair price.
Then it will just sit back and watch how far ach supplier wants to undercut the others to win Boeing's business.
idders are prequalified by Boeing, and everyone can see everyone else's ids as they are submitted.
You can really see the pressures of the marketplace and how they ork," said Pickering.
"It's like watching a horse race."
HE OTHER TRIPLE  ONVERGENCE nce heard Bill Bradley tell a story about a high-society woman from oston who goes to San Francisco for the first time.
When she comes ome and is asked by a friend how she liked it, she says, "Not very uch it's too far from the ocean."
he perspective and predispositions that you carry around in your head re very important in shaping what you see and what you don't see.
That elps to explain why a lot of people missed the triple convergence.
Their eads were completely somewhere elseeven though it was happening ight before their eyes.
Three other thingsanother convergencecame ogether to create this smoke screen.
he first was the dot-com bust, which began in March 2001.
As I said arlier, many people wrongly equated the dot-com boom with globaliza ion.
So when the dot-com boom went bust, and so many dot-coms (and the irms that supported them) imploded, these same people assumed that lobalization was imploding as well.
The sudden flameout of dogfood.com nd ten other Web sites offering to deliver ten pounds of puppy chow to our door in thirty minutes was supposed to be proof that globalization and he IT revolution were all sizzle and no beef.
his was pure foolishness.
Those who thought that globalization HE TRIPLE CONVERGENCE as the same thing as the dot-com boom and that the dot-com bust arked the end of globalization could not have been more wrong.
To say t again, the dot-com bust actually drove globalization into hypermode y forcing companies to outsource and offshore more and more func ions in order to save on scarce capital.
This was a key factor in laying the roundwork for Globalization 3.0.
Between the dot-com bust and today, oogle went from processing roughly 150 million searches per day to ore than one billion searches per day, with only a third coming from nside the United States.
As its auction model caught on worldwide, Bay went from twelve hundred employees in early 2000 to sixty-three undred by 2004, all in the period when globalization was supposed to e "over."
Between 2000 and 2004, total global Internet usage grew 125 ercent, including 186 percent in Africa, 209 percent in Latin America, 24 percent in Europe, and 105 percent in North America, according to ielsen/NetRatings.
Yes, globalization sure ended, all right.
t was not just the dot-com bust and all the hot air surrounding it that bscured all this from view.
There were two other big clouds that moved n. The biggest, of course, was 9/11, which was a profound shock to the merican body politic.
Given 9/11, and the Afghanistan and Iraq inva ions that followed, it's not surprising that the triple convergence was lost n the fog of war and the chatter of cable television.
Finally, there was the nron corporate governance scandal, quickly followed by blowups at yco and WorldComwhich all sent CEOs and the Bush administra ion running for cover.
CEOs, with some justification, became guilty un il proven innocent of boardroom shenanigans, and even the slavishly robusiness, pro-CEO Bush administration was wary of appearingin ublicto be overly solicitous of the concerns of big business.
In the pring of 2004,1 met with the head of one of America's biggest technol gy companies, who had come to Washington to lobby for more federal unding for the National Science Foundation to help nurture a stronger ndustrial base for American industry.
I asked him why the administra ion wasn't convening a summit of CEOs to highlight this issue, and he ust shook his head and said one word: "Enron."
he result: At the precise moment when the world was being flat ened, and the triple convergence was reshaping the whole global  H E W O R L D IS F L A T usiness environmentrequiring some very important adjustments in ur own society and that of many other Western developed nations merican politicians not only were not educating the American public, hey were actively working to make it stupid.
During the 2004 election ampaign we saw the Democrats debating whether NAFTA was a good dea and the Bush White House putting duct tape over the mouth of .
Gregory Mankiw, the chairman of the White House Council of conomic Advisers, and stashing him away in Dick Cheney's basement, ecause Mankiw, author of a popular college economics textbook, had ared to speak approvingly of outsourcing as just the "latest manifesta ion of the gains from trade that economists have talked about at least ince Adam Smith."
ankiw's statement triggered a competition for who could say the ost ridiculous thing in response.
The winner was speaker of the house ennis Hastert, who said that Mankiw's "theory fails a basic test of real conomics."
And what test was that, Dennis?
Poor Mankiw was barely eard from again.
or all these reasons, most people missed the triple convergence.
omething really big was happening, and it was simply not part of pub ic discourse in America or Europe.
Until I visited India in early 2004,1 oo was largely ignorant of it, although I was picking up a few hints that omething was brewing.
One of the most thoughtful business leaders I ave come to know over the years is Nobuyuki Idei, the chairman of ony.
Whenever he speaks, I pay close attention.
We saw each other wice during 2004, and both times he said something through his heavy apanese accent that stuck in my ear.
Idei said that a change was under ay in the business-technology world that would be remembered, in ime, like "the meteor that hit the earth and killed all the dinosaurs."
ortunately, the cutting-edge global companies knew what was going on ut there, and the best companies were quietly adapting to it so that they ould not be one of those dinosaurs.
s I started researching this book, I felt at times like I was in a Twilight one segment.
I would interview CEOs and technologists from major ompanies, both American-based and foreign, and they would describe n their own ways what I came to call the triple convergence.
But, for all HE TRIPLE C O N V E R G E N C E he reasons I explained above, most of them weren't telling the public or he politicians.
They were either too distracted, too focused on their own usinesses, or too afraid.
It was like they were all "pod people," living in  parallel universe, who were in on a big secret.
Yes, they all knew the se ret.
They were already innovating off thisflat-worldplatform.
They had o choice.
They had to if they wanted their companies just to survive, let lone thrive.
In doing so they were also strengthening and spreading the latform worldwide.
But nobody wanted to tell the kids.
ell, here's the truth that no one wanted to tell you: Thanks to the riple convergence, this new flat-world platform is, in effect, blowing way our walls, ceilings, and floorsall at the same time.
That is, the iring of the world with fiber-optic cable, the Internet, and work flow oftware has blown down many of the walls that prevented collaboration.
ndividuals who never dreamt they could work together, and jobs no one ver dreamt could be shifted from country to country, are suddenly on he move, now that many traditional high walls are gone.
This same plat orm has also blown away our ceilings.
Individuals who never dreamt hey could upload upload their opinions on blogs, or upload a new po itical vision, or upload an encyclopedia, or upload a new piece of soft aresuddenly found that they can have a global impact on the world, s individuals.
With the traditional ceilings gone, they can push upward nd outward in ways that were previously unimaginable.
And then, fi ally, the floors went.
Thanks to the new industry called "search," indi iduals can now drill down and search out facts, quotations, history, and he personal data of strangers as never before.
The old rock-hard cement loors that limited how deeply we could dig into the past or present of any ubject or any person are gone.
es, of course, these walls, ceilings, and floors had been eroding for a hile.
The flattening started in the late 1980s, but, with the triple con ergence, it has now reached critical mass, and it involves so many more eople and places.
o let me leave you with this thought: You know the "IT revolution" hat the business press has been touting for the last twenty years?
Sorry to ell you, but that was only the prologue.
The last twenty years were just bout forging, sharpening, and distributing all the new tools with which  H E W O R L D IS F L A T o collaborate and connect.
Now the real IT revolution is about to begin, s all the complementarities between these tools start to really work to ether to level the playing field.
One of those who pulled back the cur ain and called this moment by its real name was HP's Carly Fiorina, ho in 2004 began to declare in her public speeches that the dot-com oom and bust were just "the end of the beginning."
The last twenty-five ears in technology, said Fiorina, have been just "the warm-up act."
Now e are going into the main event, she said, "and by the main event, I ean an era in which technology will literally transform every aspect of usiness, every aspect of life and every aspect of society."
OUR he Great Sorting Out   the world starts to move from a primarily verticalcommand nd controlsystem for creating value to a more horizontal  onnect and collaboratevalue-creation model, and as we blow way more walls, ceilings, and floors at the same time, societies are going o find themselves facing a lot of very profound changes all at once.
But hese changes won't just affect how business gets done.
They will affect ow individuals, communities, and companies organize themselves, here companies and communities stop and start, how individuals bal nce their different identities as consumers, employees, shareholders, nd citizens, how people define themselves politically, and what role overnment plays in managing all of this flux.
This won't all happen vernight, but over time many roles, habits, political identities, and man gement practices that we had grown used to in the round world are go ng to have to be profoundly adjusted for the age of flatness.
To put it imply, following the great triple convergence that started right around he year 2000, we are going to experience what I would call "the great orting out."
first began thinking about the great sorting out after a conversation ith Harvard University's noted political theorist Michael J. Sandel.
andel startled me slightly by remarking that the sort of flattening rocess that I was describing was actually first identified by Karl Marx nd Friedrich Engels in the Communist Manifesto, published in 1848. hile the shrinking and flattening of the world that we are seeing today onstitute a difference of degree from what Marx saw happening in his  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ay, said Sandel, it is nevertheless part of the same historical trend Marx ighlighted in his writings on capitalism the inexorable march of tech ology and capital to remove all barriers, boundaries, frictions, and re traints to global commerce.
Marx was one of the first to glimpse the possibility of the world as a lobal market, uncomplicated by national boundaries," Sandel explained.
Marx was capitalism's fiercest critic, and yet he stood in awe of its power o break down barriers and create a worldwide system of production and onsumption.
In the Communist Manifesto, he described capitalism as a orce that would dissolve all feudal, national, and religious identities, giv ng rise to a universal civilization governed by market imperatives.
Marx onsidered it inevitable that capital would have its wayinevitable and lso desirable.
Because once capitalism destroyed all national and reli ious allegiances, Marx thought, it would lay bare the stark struggle be ween capital and labor.
Forced to compete in a global race to the bottom, he workers of the world would unite in a global revolution to end oppres ion.
Deprived of consoling distractions such as patriotism and religion, hey would see their exploitation clearly and rise up to end it."
ndeed, reading the Communist Manifesto today, I am in awe at how ncisively Marx detailed the forces that were flattening the world during he rise of the Industrial Revolution, and how much he foreshadowed he way these same forces would keep flattening the world right up to the resent.
In what are probably the key paragraphs of the Communist anifesto, Marx and Engels wrote: ll fixed, fast, frozen relations, with their train of ancient and vener ble prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones ecome antiquated before they can ossify.
All that is solid melts into ir, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face ith sober senses his real conditions of life and his relations with his ind.
The need of a constantly expanding market for its products hases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe.
It must estle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connections every here.
The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world arket given a cosmopolitan character to production and con- HE GREAT SORTING OUT umption in every country.
To the great chagrin of reactionaries, it as drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on hich it stood.
All old-established national industries have been de troyed or are daily being destroyed.
They are dislodged by new in ustries, whose introduction becomes a life and death question for ll civilised nations, by industries that no longer work up indigenous aw material, but raw material drawn from the remotest zones; in ustries whose products are consumed, not only at home, but in very quarter of the globe.
In place of the old wants, satisfied by the roduction of the country, we find new wants, requiring for their sat sfaction the products of distant lands and climes.
In place of the old ocal and national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have inter ourse in every direction, universal inter-dependence of nations.
nd as in material, so also in intellectual production.
The intellec ual creations of individual nations become common property.
ational one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more and ore impossible, and from the numerous national and local litera ures there arises a world literature.
he bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments f production, by the immensely facilitated means of communica ion, draws all, even the most barbarian nations into civilisation.
he cheap prices of commodities are the heavy artillery with which t batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbar ans' intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate.
It com els all nations, on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois ode of production; it compels them to introduce what it calls ivilisation into their midst, i.e., to become bourgeois themselves.
n one word, it creates a world after its own image.
t is hard to believe that Marx published that in 1848.
Referring to the ommunist Manifesto, Sandel told me, "You are arguing something sim lar.
What you are arguing is that developments in information technol gy are enabling companies to squeeze out all the inefficiencies and riction from their markets and business operations.
That is what your no ion of 'flattening' really means.
But a flat, frictionless world is a mixed  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lessing.
It may, as you suggest, be good for global business.
Or it may, as arx believed, augur well for a proletarian revolution.
But it may also ose a threat to the distinctive places and communities that give us our earings, that locate us in the world.
From the first stirrings of capitalism, eople have imagined the possibility of the world as a perfect market nimpeded by protectionist pressures, disparate legal systems, cultural nd linguistic differences, or ideological disagreement.
But this vision has lways bumped up against the world as it actually isfull of sources of riction and inefficiency.
Some obstacles to a frictionless global market re truly sources of waste and lost opportunities.
But some of these ineffi iencies are institutions, habits, cultures, and traditions that people cher sh precisely because they reflect nonmarket values like social cohesion, eligious faith, and national pride.
If global markets and new communi ations technologies flatten those differences, we may lose something im ortant.
That is why the debate about capitalism has been, from the very eginning, about which frictions, barriers, and boundaries are mere ources of waste and inefficiency, and which are sources of identity and elonging that we should try to protect.
From the telegraph to the nternet, every new communications technology has promised to shrink he distance between people, to increase access to information, and to ring us ever closer to the dream of a perfectiy efficient, frictionless global arket.
And each time, the question for society arises with renewed ur ency: To what extent should we stand aside, 'get with the program,' and o all we can to squeeze out yet more inefficiencies, and to what extent hould we lean against the current for the sake of values that global mar ets can't supply?
Some sources of friction are worth protecting, even in he face of a global economy that threatens to flatten them."
he biggest source of friction, of course, has always been the nationstate, with its clearly defined boundaries and laws.
Nation-states tradition lly provided the walls, ceilings, and floors that organized so much of our ives.
Are national boundaries a source of friction we should want to pre erve, or even can preserve, in a flat world?
What about legal barriers to he free flow of information, intellectual property, and capitalsuch as opyrights, worker protections, and minimum wages?
In the wake of the riple convergence, the more the flattening forces reduce friction and bar- HE GREAT SORTING OUT iers, the sharper the challenge they will pose to the nation-state and to he particular cultures, values, national identities, democratic traditions, nd bonds of restraint that have historically provided some protection and ushioning for workers and communities.
Which do we keep and which o we let melt away into air so we can all collaborate more easily?
o be sure, the walls, ceilings, and floors that structured our economic nd political life are not disappearing swiftly everywhere.
But they are dis ppearing, and it can be incredibly disruptive to those traditional institu ions that have been doing business in the same way for decades and are low to make the transition.
Think about my business, the newspaper usiness, and how it has been disrupted by the flattening of the world.
he flattening process simultaneously broke the traditional newspapers' onopoly on classified advertising (thanks to Google), its near monopoly n written news and commentary (thanks to bloggers), and its monopoly n distribution (thanks to the Internet).
The business model for news apers has been turned on its head, and the newsurvivablehybrid odel for newspapers in a flat world still has not been sorted out.
r think of the real estate business and the changes in how we buy nd sell homes now.
"Gone are the days when real estate agents could uard the information about homes for sale in their Multiple Listing ervice," USA Today reported in a May 8,2006, article.
"Now, buyers and ellers can see all the homes for sale on 800 regional multiple listing ser ices on the Web.
They can see thousands of newly built homes for sale nd apartments for rent nationwide.
They can view aerial photos of omes and neighborhoods.
They can get appraisals or see how much the ouse down the block fetched.
They can shop for loans and compare ortgage rates.
They can check out local schools and community fea ures for towns across America.
They can ask questions and get answers in nline forums.
And all of it's free.
'The Internet has done what no con umer advocate could ever do: It has reduced the distance between the onsumer and the real estate expert to the point where the consumer is so uch more informed, they don't need the expert as much as they used to,' ays Art Raby, an agent for McColly Real Estate in Valparaiso, I n d .
In 995, just 2% of home buyers used the Internet to look for a home.
Last ear, 77% of home shoppers went house-hunting online, and nearly one-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ourth of buyers first found the property they bought on the Internet, ac ording to the National Association of Realtors."
re we all going to read newspapers online?
No.
Are we all going to uy homes on the Internet?
No.
But as more of us do so, the traditional alls, ceilings, and floors that held up the old newspaper or real estate usiness models are going to be taken apart and either reassembled in ew ways that respond to and take advantage of the flat worldor done way with once and for all.
onday Morning, one of Scandinavia's leading independent think anks, found a compelling way to describe the disorienting sorting-out rocess that many institutions are now going through: "With accelerating peed, we have moved from the industrial society via the knowledge soci ty to the present stage of a disintegrating society" on our way to "a new lobal collaborative society" in which "old power structures and lessons earned are challenged by new market forces and values."
ome people will respond to this disintegrating phase with a sense of xhilaration and freedomseeing an opportunity to soar, expand, dig, or uild in any direction with a whole new set of tools.
Others will react with he anxiety of people in free fall, with nothing to hold them up or in place.
ome will feel liberated, others totally disoriented.
Anthropologists and istorians tell us that rapid social change is highly destabilizing.
What will appen to a society undergoing so much change from three directions is nybody's guess.
It is becoming stressful already.
The old boundaries alls, ceilings, and floorsare going, and we do not yet know exactly hat will replace them.
But we do know that we are all still human beings nd that human beings need walls, ceilings, and floorswe need agreedupon norms of behavior and rules of commerce.
We need agreed-upon ays of establishing authority and building communities, doing work, rotecting copyrights, and determining whom to trust.
here might these norms or standards come from?
Devotees of the pen-source movement will tell you that "the network" will establish new orms.
This is trueup to a point.
It is true that in the case, for instance, f the eBay communitya marketplace with virtually no walls, ceilings, r floorsthe community adopted a system of norms by awarding one an ther stars for honest transactions and offering users the opportunity to HE GREAT SORTING OUT rovide feedback, making everyone's transactional history totally trans arent to everyone in the community.
The result was a framework en ouraging good behavior that largely emerged from the community and s certainly maintained from the bottom up.
But the open-source devo ees are a little too glib when they say that the "network" always can be re ied upon to establish these new norms.
After all, al-Qaeda is a network, nd the values that it promotes are hardly enhancing of peace, tranquility, nd the global community.
Networks can also transmit rumors and lies aster than ever, and they don't always cure them right away.
Recall the oison that was spread on Wikipedia about John Seigenthaler Sr.
The big ie that Jews were warned not to go to work at the World Trade Center on he morning of 9/11 began somewhere in the Muslim world and spread ike a wildfire on the Internet, and no amount of news stories debunking t could eradicate that rumor.
Much depends, I believe, on the diversity of  network community.
The network that spread the lie that the Jews were arned not to go to work on 9/11 was a highly homogenous network ade up entirely, I suspect, of like-minded people who wanted to believe he lie they were spreading and did not open or expose themselves to al ernative points of view.
This is true of many networks in the flat world.
or all of these reasons, the ceilings, walls, and floors that will define s in the future are likely to be blended, collaborative models, which ombine the old and the new.
Traditional nation-states, governments, orporations, and news organizations will have to work together with mergent networks, virtual communities, superempowered individuals, nd companies to hammer out the new norms, new boundaries, new echanisms for operating in the flat world.
It will all be part of the great orting out that is sure to be at the forefront of our political and economic ebates.
Here are a few more examples of what I mean.
ofessor Sandel argued that what I call collaboration could be seen y others as just a nice name for the ability to hire cheap labor in ndia.
You cannot deny thatwhen you look at it from an American per pective.
But that is only if you look at it from one side.
From the Indian orker's perspective, that same form of collaboration, outsourcing, could e seen as another name for empowering individuals in the developing orld as never before, enabling them to nurture, exploit, and profit from heir God-given intellectual talentstalents that before the flattening of he world often rotted on the docks of Mumbai and Calcutta.
Looking at t from the American corner of the flat world, you might conclude that he frictions, barriers, and values that restrain outsourcing should be aintained, maybe even strengthened.
But from the point of view of ndians, fairness, justice, and their own aspirations demand that those ame barriers and sources of friction be removed.
In the flat world, one erson's economic liberation could be another's unemployment.
onsider this real-world case: In 2003, the state of Indiana put out to id a contract to upgrade the state's computer systems that process un mployment claims.
Guess who won?
Tata America International, hich is the U.S.-based subsidiary of India's Tata Consultancy Services td.
Tata's bid of $15.2 million came in $8.1 million lower than that of ts closest rivals, the New York-based companies Deloitte Consulting nd Accenture Ltd. No Indiana firms bid on the contract, because it was oo big for them to handle.
n other words, an Indian consulting firm won the contract to upgrade he unemployment department of the state of Indiana!
You couldn't make his up.
Indiana was outsourcing the very department that would cushion he people of Indiana from the effects of outsourcing.
Tata was planning to end some sixty-five contract employees to work in the Indiana Govern ent Center, alongside eighteen state workers.
Tata also said it would hire ocal subcontractors and do some local recruiting, but most workers would ome from India to do the computer overhauls, which, once completed, ere "supposed to speed the processing of unemployment claims, as well HE GREAT SORTING OUT s save postage and reduce hassles for businesses that pay unemployment axes," the Indianapolis Star reported on June 25, 2004.
You can probably uess how the story ended: "Top aides to then-Gov.
Frank O'Bannon had igned off on the politically sensitive, four-year contract before his death on] September 13, [2003]."
But when word of the contract was made pub ic, Republicans made it a campaign issue.
It became such a political hot otato that Governor Joe Kernan, a Democrat who had succeeded 'Bannon, ordered the state agency, which helps out-of-work Indiana res dents, to cancel the contractand also to put up some legal barriers and riction to prevent such a thing from happening again.
He also ordered hat the contract be broken up into smaller bites that Indiana firms could id forgood for Indiana firms but very costly and inefficient for the tate.
The Indianapolis Star reported that a check for $993,587 was sent o pay off Tata for eight weeks of work, during which it had trained fortyfive state programmers in the development and engineering of up-to-date oftware: "'The company was great to work with,' said Alan Degner, ndiana's commissioner of workforce development."
o now I have just one simple question: Who is the exploiter and who s the exploited in this India-Indiana story?
The American arm of an ndian consulting firm proposes to save the taxpayers of Indiana $8.1 mil ion by revamping their computers using both its Indian employees nd local hires from Indiana.
The deal would greatly benefit the Ameri an arm of the Indian consultancy; it would benefit some Indiana tech orkers; and it would save Indiana state residents precious tax dollars hat could be deployed to hire more state workers somewhere else, or uild new schools that would permanently shrink its roles of unem loyed.
And yet the whole contract, which was signed by pro-labor Demo rats, got torn up under pressure from free-trade Republicans.
ort that out.
n the old world, where value was largely being created vertically, usu lly within a single company and from the top down, it was very easy to see ho was on the top and who was on the bottom, who was exploiting and ho was being exploited.
But when the world starts to flatten out and value ncreasingly gets created horizontally (through multiple forms of collabo ation, in which individuals and little guys have much more power), who  H E W O R L D IS F L A T s on the top and who is on the bottom, who is exploiter and who is ex loited, gets very complicated.
Some of our old political reflexes no onger apply.
Were the Indian engineers not being "exploited" when their overnment educated them in some of the best technical institutes in the orld inside India, but then that same Indian government pursued a so ialist economic policy that could not provide those engineers with work n India, so that those who could not get out of India had to drive taxis to at?
Are those same engineers now being exploited when they join the iggest consulting company in India, are paid a very comfortable wage in ndian terms, and, thanks to the flat world, can now apply their skills glob lly?
Or are those Indian engineers now exploiting the people of Indiana y offering to revamp their state unemployment system for much less oney than an American consulting firm?
Or were the people of Indiana xploiting those cheaper Indian engineers?
Someone please tell me: Who s exploiting whom in this story?
With whom does the traditional Left tand in this story?
With the knowledge workers from the developing orld, being paid a decent wage, who are trying to use their hard-won tal nts in the developed world?
Or with the politicians of Indiana, who anted to deprive these Indian engineers of work so that it could be done, ore expensively, by their constituents?
And with whom does the tradi ional Right stand in this story?
With those who want to hold down taxes nd shrink the state budget of Indiana by outsourcing some work, or with hose who say, "Let's raise taxes more in order to reserve the work here and eserve it just for people from Indiana"?
With those who want to keep ome friction in the system, even though that goes against every Repub ican instinct on free trade, just to help people from Indiana?
If you are gainst globalization because you think it harms people in developing ountries, whose side are you on in this story: India's or Indiana's?
he India versus Indiana dispute highlights the difficulties in drawing ines between the interests of two communities that never before imagined hey were connected, much less collaborators.
But suddenly they each oke up and discovered that in a flat world, where work increasingly be omes a horizontal collaboration, they were not only connected and col aborating but badly in need of a social contract to govern their relations.
he larger point here is this: Whether we are talking about manage- HE REAT SORTING OUT ent science or political science, manufacturing or research and devel pment, many, many players and processes are going to have to come to rips with "horizontalization."
And it is going to take a lot of sorting out.
st as the relationship between different groups of workers will have o be sorted out in a flat world, so too will the relationship between ompanies and the communities in which they operate.
Whose values ill govern a particular company and whose interests will that com any respect and promote?
It is clear that in a flat world, global corpo ations will adapt to make the most of global opportunities and global esourcesand that increasingly means adapting themselves to a flat orld.
In the past, though, a country benefited from and depended pon the success or hegemony of its leading companies to define its conomic well-being and its standing in the world.
What happens as usinesses define their interests and labor opportunities more globally han domestically, and as the whole shareholding process demands ore and more that these companies perform against global standards, pportunities, and resources?
What happens is that the interests and eeds of these companies align less and less perfectly with those of the ational domains (the countries) in which they are headquartered.
It sed to be said that as General Motors goes, so goes America.
But today t would be said, "As Dell goes, so goes Malaysia, Taiwan, China, reland, India .
."
HP today has well over 150,000 employees in at east 170 countries.
It is not only the largest consumer technology com any in the world; it is the largest IT company in Europe, the largest IT ompany in Russia, the largest IT company in the Middle East, and the argest IT company in South Africa.
Is HP an American company if a ajority of its employees and customers are outside of America, even hough it is headquartered in Palo Alto?
Corporations cannot survive oday as entities bounded by any single nation-state, not even one as ig as the United States.
So the current keep-you-awake-at-night issue  H E W O R L D IS F L A T or nation-states and their citizens is how to deal with these corpora ions.
To whom are they loyal?
Corporate America has done very well, and there is nothing wrong ith that, but it has done well by aligning itself with the flat world," said inakar Singh, the hedge fund manager.
"It has done that by outsourcing s many components as possible to the cheapest, most efficient suppliers.
f Dell can build every component of its computers in coastal China and ell them in coastal America, Dell benefits, and American consumers enefit, but it is hard to make the case that American labor benefits."
So ell wants as flat a world as possible, with as little friction and as few bar iers as possible.
So do most other corporations today, because this allows hem to build things in the most low-cost, efficient markets and sell in the ost lucrative markets.
There is almost nothing about Globalization 3.0 hat is not good for capital.
Capitalists can sit back, buy up any innova ion, and then hire the best, cheapest labor input from anywhere in the orld to research it, develop it, produce it, and distribute it.
Dell stock oes well, Dell shareholders do well, Dell customers do well, and the asdaq does well.
All the things related to capital do fine.
But only some merican workers will benefit, and only some communities.
Others will eel the pain that the flattening of the world brings about.
ince multinationals first started scouring the earth for labor and arkets, their interests have always gone beyond those of the nation-state n which they were headquartered.
But what is going on today, on the flat arth, is such a difference of degree that it amounts to a difference in ind.
Companies have never had more freedom, and less friction, in the ay of assigning research, low-end manufacturing, and high-end manu acturing anywhere in the world.
What this will mean for the long-term elationship between companies and the country in which they are eadquartered is simply unclear.
onsider this vivid example: On December 7, 2004, IBM an ounced that it was selling its whole Personal Computing Division to he Chinese computer company Lenovo to create a new worldwide PC ompanythe globe's third largestwith approximately $12 billion in nnual revenue.
Simultaneously, though, IBM said that it would be aking an 18.9 percent equity stake in Lenovo, creating a strategic al-  H E GREAT SORTING OUT iance between IBM and Lenovo in PC sales, financing, and service orldwide.
The new combined company's worldwide headquarters, it as announced, would be in New York, but its principal manufactur ng operations would be in Beijing and Raleigh, North Carolina; re earch centers would be in China, the United States, and Japan; and ales offices would be around the world.
The new Lenovo will be the referred supplier of PCs to IBM, and IBM will also be the new enovo's preferred supplier of services and financing.
re you still with me?
About ten thousand people will move from IBM o Lenovo, which was created in 1984 and was the first company to intro uce the home computer concept in China.
Since 1997, Lenovo has been he leading PC brand in China.
My favorite part of the press release is the ollowing, which identifies the new company's senior executives: '"Yang uanqingChairman of the Board.
[He's currently C E O of Lenovo.]
teve WardChief Executive Officer.
[He's currently IBM's senior vice resident and general manager of IBM's Personal Systems Group.]
Fran 'Sullivan Chief Operating Officer.
[She's currently general manager f IBM's PC division.]
Mary MaChief Financial Officer.
[She's cur ently C F O of Lenovo.]"
alk about horizontal value creation: This new Chinese-owned com uter company headquartered in New York with factories in Raleigh and eijing will have a Chinese chairman, an American C E O , an American PO, and a Chinese CFO, and it will be listed on the Hong Kong stock xchange.
Would you call this an American company?
A Chinese com any?
To which country will Lenovo feel more attached?
Or will it just ee itself sort of floating above a flat earth?
his question was anticipated in the press release announcing the ew company: "Where will Lenovo be headquartered?"
it asked.
nswer: "As a global business, the new Lenovo will be geographically ispersed, with people and physical assets located worldwide."
ort that out.
he cold, hard truth is that management, shareholders, and investors are argely indifferent to where their profits come from or even where the em loyment is created.
But they do want sustainable companies.
Politicians, hough, are compelled to stimulate the creation of jobs in a certain place.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T nd residentswhether they are Americans, Europeans, or Indianswant o know that the good jobs are going to stay close to home.
he C E O of a major European multinational remarked to me, "We re a global research company now."
That's great news for his share olders and investors.
He is accessing the best brains on the planet, herever they are, and almost certainly saving money by not doing all he research in his backyard.
"But ultimately," he confided to me, "this is oing to have implications down the road on jobs in my own country aybe not this year but in five or fifteen years."
As a C E O and European nion citizen, "you might have a dialogue with your government about ow we can retain capabilities in [our own country]but day by day you ave to make decisions with the shareholders in mind."
ranslation: If I can buy five brilliant researchers in China and/or ndia for the price of one in Europe or America, I will buy the five; and f, in the long run, that means my own society loses part of its skills base, o be it.
The only way to converge the interests of the two the company nd its country of origin is to have a really smart population that can ot only claim its slice of the bigger global pie but invent its own new lices as well.
"We have grown addicted to our high salaries, and now we re really going to have to earn them," the C E O said.
ut even identifying a company's country of origin today is getting arder and harder.
Sir John Rose, the chief executive of Rolls-Royce, told e once, "We have a big business in Germany.
We are the biggest high ech employer in the state of Brandenburg.
I was recently at a dinner with hancellor [Gerhard] Schroeder.
And he said to me, Tou are a German ompany, why don't you come along with me on my next visit to Russia'  o try to drum up business there for German companies."
The German hancellor, said Rose, "was recognizing that although my headquarters ere in London, my business was involved in creating value in Germany, nd that could be constructive in his relationship with Russia."
ere you have the quintessential British company, Rolls-Royce, hich, though still headquartered in England, now operates through a orizontal global supply chain, and its C E O , a British citizen knighted y the queen, is being courted by the chancellor of Germany to help him HE GREAT SORTING OUT rum up business in Russia, because one link in the Rolls-Royce supply hain happens to run through Brandenburg.
y friend Glen Fukushima is an American of Japanese ancestry.
is father, also a Japanese American, was based in Japan with the U.S. rmy, so Glen was born in a U.S. military hospital there in 1949.
He raduated from Stanford and Harvard and eventually moved in 1985 rom law practice to become director for Japanese affairs at the Office f the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) and then deputy assistant STR for Japan and China, representing the United States in its tough rade disputes with these two Asian giants.
In 1990 he moved to Tokyo, here he subsequently held a series of high-level executive jobs with T&T and other multinational U.S. corporations.
In 1997 he was lected by his American peers to be president of the American hamber of Commerce in Japan, a volunteer job he held with great istinction.
When I passed through Tokyo in September 2005, we had ur usual breakfast at his corner table at the Hotel Okura.
I asked ukushima about his work, and he surprised me by announcing that e had a new job: He had just become the president of Japan opera ions for the European consortium Airbus.
He was now running the apan business of the crown jewel manufacturing company of Europe, elping it try to beat out the crown jewel manufacturing company of merica, Boeing, in selling passenger aircraft to Japan, the country of is ancestors.
When I joined Airbus, the U.S. embassy here told me that I was no onger allowed to attend the monthly meeting that the board of gover ors of the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan has with the .S.
ambassador," said Fukushima, who, when he was president of that hamber, presided over its fiftieth anniversary.
The embassy employ es, reacting on ingrained instincts, didn't want a person they saw as epresenting Europe's leading industrial consortium to gain any assis ance from the U.S. embassy that might help him compete against one f America's biggest industrial firms.
Fukushima, however, argued that I am doing something new and different that reflects the times and hat defies neat national categories."
There is no longer a correlation, HE  O R L D IS F L A T e said, among the nationality of a global corporation's executives, the eographic location of the corporation's headquarters, and the market n which its top executives are doing their most important business.
uite a few ACCJ board members who attended the monthly meeting, or instance, were U.S. citizens who had started their own companies n Japan, with no U.S. operations or employees, or they were U.S. citi ens working for non-U.S. companies, or they were Japanese citizens orking for American companies.
Moreover, roughly 35 percent of the ew Boeing 787's airframe is being made in Japan by Mitsubishi Heavy ndustries and other Japanese manufacturers.
Another significant amount s being made or designed in Europe, Russia, China, and other places  ven though Boeing (which is headquartered in Chicago) is usually outed as "America's biggest exporter."
es, sort that out.
ROM C O M M A N D AND C O N T R O L T O OLLABORATE AND C O N N E C T  fore Colin Powell stepped down as secretary of state, I went in for n interview, which was also attended by two of his press advisers, in is seventh-floor State Department suite.
I could not resist asking him bout where he was when he realized the world had gone flat.
He an wered with one word: "Google."
Powell said that when he took over as ecretary of state in 2001, and he needed some bit of information say, he text of a UN resolutionhe would call an aide and have to wait for inutes or even hours for someone to dig it up for him.
Now I just type into Google 'UNSC Resolution 242' and up comes he text," he said.
Powell explained that with each passing year, he found imself doing more and more of his own research, at which point one of is press advisers remarked, "Yes, now he no longer comes asking for in ormation.
He already has the information.
He comes asking for action."
owell, a former member of the AOL board, also regularly used e-mail  H E GREAT SORTING OUT o contact other foreign ministers and, according to one of his aides, kept p a constant instant-messaging relationship with Britain's foreign secre ary, Jack Straw, at summit meetings, as if they were a couple of college stu ents.
Thanks to the cell phone and wireless technology, said Powell, no oreign minister can run and hide from him.
He said he had been looking or Russia's foreign minister the previous week.
First he tracked him down n his cell phone in Moscow, then on his cell phone in Iceland, and then n his cell phone in Vientiane, Laos.
"We have everyone's cell phone umber," said Powell of his fellow foreign ministers.
he point I take away from all this is that when the world goes flat, hi rarchies are not being leveled just by little people being able to act big.
hey are also being leveled by big people being able to act really small n the sense that they are enabled to do many more things on their own.
t really hit me when Powell's junior media adviser, a young woman, alked me down from his office and remarked along the way that be ause of e-mail, Powell could get hold of her and her boss at any hour, ia their BlackBerrysand did.
I can't get away from the guy," she said jokingly of his constant e-mail nstructions.
But in the next breath she added that on the previous week nd, she was shopping at the mall with some friends when she got an in tant message from Powell asking her to do some public affairs task.
"My riends were all impressed," she said.
"Little me, and I'm talking to the ecretary of state!"
his is what happens when you move from a vertical (command and ontrol) world to a much more horizontal (connect and collaborate) flat orld.
Your boss can do his job and your job.
He can be secretary of state nd his own secretary.
He can give you instructions day or night.
So you re never out.
You are always in.
Therefore, you are always on.
Bosses, if hey are inclined, can collaborate more directly with more of their staff han ever before no matter who they are or where they are in the hier rchy.
But staffers will also have to work much harder to be better in ormed than their bosses.
There are a lot more conversations between osses and staffers today that start like this: "I know that already!
I oogled it myself.
Now what do I do about it?"
H E W O R L D IS F L A T ULTIPLE DENTITY ISORDER   is not only communities and companies that have multiple identities hat will need sorting out in a flat world.
So too will individuals.
In a lat world, the tensions among our identities as consumers, employees, itizens, taxpayers, and shareholders are going to come into sharper and harper conflict.
In the nineteenth century," said business consultant Michael Ham er, "the great conflict was between labor and capital.
Now it is between ustomer and worker, and the company is the guy in the middle.
The onsumer turns to the company and says, 'Give me more for less.'
And hen companies turn to employees and say, 'If we don't give them more or less, we are in trouble.
I can't guarantee you a job and a union stew rd can't guarantee you a job, only a customer can.'"
he New York Times reported (November 1, 2004) that Wal-Mart spent bout $1.3 billion of its $256 billion in revenue in 2003 on employee ealth care, to insure about 537,000 people, or about 45 percent of its orkforce.
Wal-Mart's biggest competitor, though, Costco Wholesale, in ured 96 percent of its eligible full-time or part-time employees.
Costco mployees become eligible for health insurance after three months work ng full-time or six months working part-time.
At Wal-Mart, most full-time mployees have to wait six months to become eligible, while part-timers re not eligible for at least two years.
According to the Times, full-time mployees at Wal-Mart make about $1,200 per month, or $8 per hour.
al-Mart requires employees to cover 3 3 percent of the cost of their ben fits, and it plans to reduce that employee contribution to 30 percent.
al-Mart-sponsored health plans have monthly premiums for family overage ranging as high as $264 and out-of-pocket expenses as high as 13,000 in some cases, and such medical costs make health coverage unaffordable even for many Wal-Mart employees who are covered, the imes said.
ut the same article went on to say this: "If there is any place where al-Mart's labor costs find support, it is Wall Street, where Costco has aken a drubbing from analysts who say its labor costs are too high."
WalMart has taken more fat and friction out than Costco, which has kept HE GREAT SORTING OUT ore in, because it feels a different obligation to its workers.
Costco's pre ax profit margin is only 2.7 percent of revenue, less than half Wal-Mart's argin of 5.5 percent.
ut wait a minute, doesn't the Wal-Mart shopper in all of us want he lowest prices possible, with all the middlemen, fat, and friction re oved?
And don't the poorest Americans those often also without ealth carebenefit most from that?
That is a point Sebastian Mallaby ade in an opinion essay in The Washington Post (November 28, 2005).
isten to his argument: "Wal-Mart's critics allege that the retailer is bad or poor Americans.
This claim is backward: As Jason Furman of New ork University puts it, Wal-Mart is a progressive success story.'
Furman dvised John 'Benedict Arnold' Kerry in the 2004 campaign and has ever received any payment from Wal-Mart; he is no corporate apolo ist.
But he points out that Wal-Mart's discounting on food alone boosts he welfare of American shoppers by at least $50 billion a year.
The sav ngs are possibly five times that much if you count all of Wal-Mart's roducts.
These gains are especially important to poor and moderateincome families.
The average Wal-Mart customer earns $35,000 a year, ompared with $50,000 at Target and $74,000 at Costco.
Moreover, al-Mart's 'every day low prices' make the biggest difference to the oor, since they spend a higher proportion of income on food and other asics.
As a force for poverty relief, Wal-Mart's $200 billion-plus assis ance to consumers may rival many federal programs."
o the Wal-Mart shareholder and shopper in us wants Wal-Mart to be elentless about removing the fat and friction in its supply chain and in ts employee benefits packages in order to fatten the company's profits  nd to keep its prices low.
But the Wal-Mart worker in us hates the lim ted benefits and low pay packages that Wal-Mart offers its starting mployees.
And the Wal-Mart citizen in us knows that because WalMart, the biggest company in America, doesn't cover all its employees ith health care, some of them will just go to the emergency ward of the ocal hospital and the taxpayers will end up picking up the tab.
The imes reported that a survey by Georgia officials found that "more than 0,000 children of Wal-Mart employees were in the state's health pro ram for children at an annual cost of nearly $10 million to taxpayers."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T imilarly, it said, a "North Carolina hospital found that 31 percent of ,900 patients who described themselves as Wal-Mart employees were n Medicaid, while an additional 16 percent had no insurance at all."
n her 2004 book, Selling Women Short: The Landmark Battle for orkers' Rights at Wal-Mart, journalist Liza Featherstone followed the uge women's discrimination suit against Wal-Mart.
In an interview bout the book with Salon.com (November 22, 2004), she made the fol owing important point: "American taxpayers chip in to pay for many ull-time Wal-Mart employees because they usually require incremental ealth insurance, public housing, food stampsthere are so many ways n which Wal-Mart employees are not able to be self-sufficient.
This is ery ironic, because Sam Walton is embraced as the American symbol of elf-sufficiency.
It is really troubling and dishonest that Wal-Mart sup orts Republican candidates in the way that they do: 80 percent of their orporate campaign contributions go to Republicans.
But Republicans end not to support the types of public assistance programs that Wal-Mart epends on.
If anything, Wal-Mart should be crusading for national ealth insurance.
They should at least be acknowledging that because hey are unable to provide these things for their employees, we should ave a more general welfare state."
s you sort out and weigh your multiple identitiesconsumer, em loyee, citizen, taxpayer, shareholderyou have to decide: Do you prefer he Wal-Mart approach or the Costco approach?
This is going to be an mportant political issue in a flat world: Just how flat do you want corpo ations to be when you factor in all your different identities?
Because hen you take the middleman out of business, when you totally flatten our supply chain, you also take a certain element of humanity out of life.
he same question applies to government.
How flat do you want gov rnment to be?
How much friction would you like to see government re ove, through deregulation, to make it easier for companies to compete n Planet Flat?
aid Congressman Rahm Emanuel, an Illinois Democrat who was a enior adviser to President Clinton, "When I served in the White House, e streamlined the FDA's drug approval process in response to concerns bout its cumbersome nature.
We took those steps with one objective in HE GREAT SORTING OUT ind: to move drugs to the marketplace more quickly.
The result, how ver, has been an increasingly cozy relationship between the FDA and he pharmaceutical industry, which has put public health at risk.
The ioxx debacle [over an anti-inflammatory drug that was found to lead to n increased risk for heart attacks and strokes] shows the extent to which rug safety has taken a backseat to speedy approval.
A recent Senate earing on Vioxx's recall revealed major deficiencies in the FDA's abil ty to remove dangerous drugs from the market."
s consumers we want the cheapest drugs that the global supply hains can offer, but as citizens we want and need government to over ee and regulate that supply chain, even if it means preserving or adding riction.
ort that out.
mething else is absolutely going to have to be sorted out in a flat orld: Who owns what?
How do we build legal barriers to protect an nnovator's intellectual property so he or she can reap its financial bene its and plow those profits into a new invention?
And from the other side, ow do we keep walls low enough so that we encourage the sharing of ntellectual property, which is required more and more to do cuttingedge innovation?
The world is decidedly not flat when it comes to uniform treatment f intellectual property," said Craig Mundie, Microsoft's chief technology fficer.
It is wonderful, he noted, to have a world where a single innovator an summon so many resources by himself or herself, assemble a team of artners from around the flat world, and make a real breakthrough with ome product or service.
But what does that wonderful innovative engi eer do, asked Mundie, "when someone else uses the same flat-world latform and tools to clone and distribute his wonderful new product?"
his happens in the world of software, music, and pharmaceuticals every ay.
And the technology is reaching a point now where "you should as-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ume that there isn't anything that can't be counterfeited quickly"from icrosoft Word to airplane parts, he added.
The flatter the world gets, the ore we are going to need a system of global governance that keeps up ith all the new legal and illegal forms of collaboration.
e can also see this in the case of patent law as it has evolved in the nited States.
Companies can do one of three things with an innovation: hey can patent the widget they invent and sell it themselves; they can atent it and license it to someone else to manufacture; or they can atent it and cross-license with several other companies so that they all ave freedom of action to make a productlike a PCthat comes from elding many different patents.
American patent law is technically neu ral on this.
But the way established case law has evolved, experts tell me, t is decidedly biased against cross-licensing and other arrangements that ncourage collaboration or freedom of action for as many players as pos ible; it is more focused on protecting the rights of individual firms to anufacture their own patents.
In a flat world, companies need a patent ystem that encourages both approaches.
The more your legal structure osters cross-licensing and standards, the more collaborative innovation ou will get.
The PC is the product of a lot of cross-licensing between the ompany that had the patent on the cursor and the company that had the atent on the mouse and the screen.
o, with more and more innovation emerging from open-source ollaborations and communities, intellectual property law has to ad ustor else we as a society will not get the benefits or be protected rom the drawbacks of a flat world.
"For collaborative innovation to lourish, we must rethink our ideas about intellectual property," ar ues IBM's chairman Sam Palmisano.
"Intellectual property laws ere created to enable individuals and institutions to reap the rewards f their inventions, while at the same time making these intellectual ssets available for society as a whole.
Within this rather delicate frame ork, however, there are diverging opinions about whose interests hould come first.
Some believe the best way to provide incentives for nnovation is by fiercely protecting the inventor's proprietary interest.
thers argue that we should open the doors and give full access to in ellectual assets.
I believe we need a new path forward, an approach  H E GREAT SORTING OUT hat offers a balance of those two extremes.
We must protect the inter sts of individuals and companies that create truly new, novel, and use ul inventions.
But at the same time, we need to protect the interests of nnovative communities, creative ecosystemsgroups that are not in orporated or chartered but that nonetheless are engaged in gen ineand genuinely importantinnovation.
We need expanded otions of ownership, for a postindustrial world."
nd while you are sorting out that ownership question, sort this one ut as well.
On November 13, 2004, Lance Corporal Justin M. Ells orth, twenty, was killed by a roadside bomb during a foot patrol in Iraq.
n December 21,2004, the Associated Press reported that his family was emanding that Yahoo!
give them the password for their deceased son's -mail account so they could have access to all his e-mail, including otes to and from others.
"I want to be able to remember him in his ords.
I know he thought he was doing what he needed to do.
I want to ave that for the future," John Ellsworth, Justin's father, told the AP.
"It's he last thing I have of my son."
We are moving into a world where more nd more communication is in the form of bits traveling through cyber pace and stored on servers located all over the world.
No government ontrols this cyberrealm.
So the question is: Who owns your bits when ou die?
The AP reported that Yahoo!
denied the Ellsworth family their on's password, citing the fact that Yahoo!
policy calls for erasing all ac ounts that are inactive for ninety days and the fact that all Yahoo!
users gree at sign-up that rights to a member's ID or account contents termi ate upon death.
"While we sympathize with any grieving family, Yahoo!
ccounts and any contents therein are nontransferable" even after death, aren Mahon, a Yahoo!
spokeswoman, told the AP.
As we get rid of more nd more paper and communicate through more and more digitized for ats, you better sort out before you die, and include in your will, to hom, if anyone, you want to leave your bits.
This is very real.
I stored any chapters of this book in my AOL account, feeling it would be safest n cyberspace.
If something had happened to me during my writing, my amily and publisher would have had to sue AOL to try to get this text.
omebody, please, sort all this out.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T EATH F HE ALESMEN   the fall of 2004,1 went out to Minneapolis to visit my mother and had hree world-is-flat encounters right in a row.
First, before I left home in ashington, I dialed 411directory assistanceto try to get a friend's hone number in Minneapolis.
A computer answered and a computer zed voice asked me to pronounce the name of the person whose number  was requesting.
For whatever reason, I could not get the computer to ear me correctly, and it kept saying back to me in a computerized voice, Did you say .
?"
I kept having to say the family name in a voice that asked my exasperation (otherwise the computer never would have un erstood me).
"No, I didn't say that...
I said .
. "
Eventually, I was con ected to an operator, but I did not enjoy this friction-free encounter with irectory information.
I craved the friction of another human being.
It ay be cheaper and more efficient to have a computer dispense phone umbers, but for me it brought only frustration.
hen I arrived in Minneapolis, I had dinner with family friends, ne of whom has spent his life working as a wholesaler in the Midwest, elling goods to the biggest retailers in the region.
He is a natural sales an.
When I asked him what was new, he sighed and said that busi ess just wasn't what it used to be.
Everything was now being sold at 1 ercent margins, he explained.
No problem.
He was selling mostly ommodity items so that, given his volumes, he could handle the slim rofit margin.
But what bothered him was the fact that he no longer ad human contact with some of his biggest accounts.
Even com odities and low-cost goods have certain differentiating elements that eed to be sold and highlighted.
"Everything is by e-mail now," he said.
I am dealing with a young kid at [one of the biggest retailers in the na ion], and he says, 'Just e-mail me your bid.'
I've never met him.
Half he time he doesn't get back to me.
I am not sure how to deal with im .
In the old days, I used to stop by the office, give the buyers a ew Vikings tickets.
We were friends .
Tommy, all anyone cares bout today is price."
ortunately, my friend is a successful businessman and has a range of nterprises.
But as I reflected later on what he was saying, I was drawn back HE GREAT SORTING OUT o that scene in Death of a Salesman in which Willy Loman says that, un ike his colleague Charley, he intends to be "well liked."
He tells his sons hat in business and in life, character, personality, and human connections re more important than smarts.
Says Willy, "The man who makes an ap earance in the business world, the man who creates personal interest, is he man who gets ahead.
Be liked and you will never want."
ot when the world goes flat.
It's hard to create a human bond with -mail and streaming Internet.
The next day, I had dinner with my friend en Greer, who runs a media company that I discuss in greater detail ater.
Ken had a similar lament: So many contracts were going these days o the advertising firms that were selling just numbers, not creative in tinct.
Then Ken said something that really hit home with me: "It is like hey have cut all the fat out of the business" and turned everything into a umbers game.
"But fat is what gives meat its taste," Ken added.
"The eanest cuts of meat don't taste very good.
You want it marbled with at east a little fat."
he flattening process relentlessly trims the fat out of business and ife, but, as Ken noted, fat is what gives life taste and texture.
Fat is also hat keeps us warm.
es, the consumer in us wants Wal-Mart prices, with all the fat gone.
ut the employee in us wants a little fat left on the bone, the way Costco oes it, so that it can offer health care to almost all its employees, rather han just less than half of them, as Wal-Mart does.
But the shareholder in s wants Wal-Mart's profit margins, not Costco's.
Yet the citizen in us ants Costco's benefits, rather than Wal-Mart's, because the difference ltimately may have to be paid for by society.
The consumer in me wants ower phone bills, but the human being in me also wants to speak to an perator when I call 411.
Yes, the reader in me loves to surf the Net and ead the bloggers, but the citizen in me also wishes that some of those loggers had an editor, a middleman, to tell them to check some of their acts one more time before they pressed the Send button and told the hole world that something was wrong or unfair.
iven these conflicting emotions and pressures, there is potential ere for American politics to get completely reshuffledwith workers nd corporate interests realigning themselves into different parties.
Think  H E W O R L D IS F L A T bout it: Social conservatives from the right wing of the Republican party, ho do not like globalization or closer integration with the world because t brings too many foreigners and foreign cultural mores into America, ight align themselves with unions from the left wing of the Democratic arty, who don't like globalization for the way it facilitates the outsourcing nd offshoring of jobs.
They might be called the Wall Party and militate or more friction and fat everywhere.
Let's face it: Republican cultural onservatives have much more in common with the steelworkers of oungstown, Ohio, the farmers of rural China, and the mullahs of central audi Arabia, who would also like more walls, than they do with invest ent bankers on Wall Street or service workers linked to the global econ my in Palo Alto, who have been enriched by the flattening of the world.
eanwhile, the business wing of the Republican Party, which be ieves in free trade, deregulation, more integration, and lower taxes verything that would flatten the world even moremay end up aligning tself with the social liberals of the Democratic Party, many of whom are ast Coast or West Coast global service industry workers.
They might lso be joined by Hollywood and other entertainment workers.
All of hem are huge beneficiaries of the flat world.
They might be called the eb Party, whose main platform would be to promote more global inte ration.
Many residents of Manhattan and Palo Alto have more interests n common with the people of Shanghai and Bangalore than they do ith the residents of Youngstown or Topeka.
In short, in a flat world, we re likely to see many social liberals, white-collar global service industry orkers, and Wall Street types driven together, and many social conserv tives, white-collar local service industry workers, and labor unions riven together.
he Passion of the Christ audience will be in the same trench with he Teamsters and the AFL-CIO, while the Hollywood and Wall Street iberals and the You've Got Mail crowd will be in the same trench with he high-tech workers of Silicon Valley and the global service providers f Manhattan and San Francisco.
It will be Mel Gibson and Jimmy offa Jr. versus Bill Gates and Meg Ryan.
ore and more, politics in the flat world will consist of asking which alues, frictions, and fats are worth preservingwhich should, in Marx's HE GREAT SORTING OUT anguage, be kept solid and which must be left to melt away into the ir.
Countries, companies, and individuals will be able to give intelligent nswers to these questions only if they understand the real nature and exture of the global playing field and how different it is from the one that xisted in the Cold War era and before.
And countries, companies, and ndividuals will be able to make sound political choices only if they fully ppreciate the flattened playing field and understand all the new tools ow available to them for collaborating and competing on it.
I hope this ook will provide a nuanced framework for this hugely important politi al debate and the great sorting out that is just around the corner.
o that end, the next three sections look at how the flattening of the orld and the triple convergence will affect Americans, developing ountries, and companies.
race yourself: You are about to enter the flat world.
merica and the lat World IVE merica and Free Trade s Ricardo Still Right?
an American who has always believed in the merits of free trade,  had an important question to answer after my India trip: Should  still believe in free trade in a flat world?
Here was an issue that eeded sorting out immediatelynot only because it was becoming a hot ssue in national politics but also because my whole view of the flat world ould depend on my view of free trade.
I know that free trade won't nec ssarily benefit every American, and that our society will have to help hose who are harmed by it.
But for me the key question was: Will free rade benefit America as a whole when the world becomes so flat and so any more people can collaborate, and compete, with my kids?
It seems hat so many more jobs that we think of as "American" are going to be up or grabs.
Wouldn't individual Americans be better off if our government rected some walls and banned some outsourcing and offshoring?
first wrestled with this issue while filming the Discovery Times docu entary in Bangalore.
One day we went to the Infosys campus around five .m.
just when the Infosys call-center workers were flooding into the rounds for the overnight shift on foot, minibus, and motor scooter, while any of the more advanced engineers were leaving at the end of the day hift.
The crew and I were standing at the gate observing this river of edu ated young people flowing in and out, many in animated conversation.
hey all looked as if they had scored 1,600 on their SATs, and I felt a real ind-eye split overtaking me.
My mind just kept telling me, "Ricardo is ight, Ricardo is right, Ricardo is right."
David Ricardo (1772-1823) was the nglish economist who developed the free-trade theory of comparative  H E W O R L D IS F L A T dvantage, which stipulates that if each nation specializes in the production f goods in which it has a comparative cost advantage and then trades with ther nations for the goods in which they specialize, there will be an overall ain in trade, and overall income levels should rise in each trading country.
o if all these Indian techies were doing what was their comparative advan age and then turning around and using their income to buy all the prod cts from America that are our comparative advantagefrom Corning lass to Microsoft Windowsboth our countries would benefit, even if ome individual Indians or Americans might have to shift jobs in the transi ion.
And one can see evidence of this mutual benefit in the sharp increase n exports and imports between the United States and India in recent years.
ut my eye kept looking at all these Indian zippies and telling me omething else: "Oh, my God, there are so many of them, and they all ook so serious, so eager for work.
And they just keep coming, wave after ave. How in the world can it possibly be good for my daughters and mil ions of other young Americans that these Indians can do the same jobs s they can for a fraction of the wages?"
When Ricardo was writing, goods ere tradable, but for the most part knowledge work and services were ot.
There was no undersea fiber-optic cable to make knowledge jobs radable between America and India back then.
Just as I was getting orked up with worry, the Infosys spokeswoman accompanying me ca ually mentioned that last year Infosys India received "one million appli ations" from young Indians for nine thousand tech jobs.
ave a nice day.
struggled over what to make of this scene.
I don't want to see any merican lose his or her job to foreign competition or to technological nnovation.
I sure wouldn't want to lose mine.
When you lose your job, he unemployment rate is not 5.2 percent; it's 100 percent.
No book bout the flat world would be honest if it did not acknowledge such con erns, or acknowledge that there is some debate among economists bout whether Ricardo is still right.
Having listened to the arguments on oth sides, though, I come down where the great majority of economists ome downthat Ricardo is still right and that more American individ als will be better off if we don't erect barriers to outsourcing, supplychaining, and offshoring than if we do.
M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E hat is the simple message of this chapter: Even as the world gets lat, America as a whole will benefit more by sticking to the general rinciples of free trade, as it always has, than by trying to erect walls, hich will only provoke others to do the same and impoverish us all.
ut the broader argument of this whole section of the book"America nd the Flat World" is that while protectionism would be counter roductive, a policy of free trade, while necessary, is not enough by it elf.
It must be accompanied by a focused domestic strategy aimed at pgrading the education of every American, so that he or she will be ble to compete for the new jobs in a flat world.
And it must be ac ompanied by a foreign strategy of opening restricted markets all over he world (including some of our own, like agriculture), thereby bring ng more countries into the global free-trade systemwhich will in rease demand for goods and services, spur innovation, and reduce oth unemployment and job migration across the globe.
f course, the protectionist/anti-outsourcing school disagrees.
Neither f the above strategies will work anymore, this school insists.
The antioutsourcers argue that in a flat world not only are more goods tradable, ut many services have become tradable as wellthe very service jobs hat support the American middle class but were never exposed to the orces of automation or outsourcing to the degree they are now.
Because f this change, America and other developed countries could be headed or an absolute decline, not just a relative one, in their economic power nd living standards unless they move to formally protect certain jobs, oth blue-collar and white-collar, from foreign competition.
There is no ay that so many new players can enter the global economy, in services nd high-end manufacturingfields long dominated by Americans, uropeans, and Japanesewithout wages settling in at a newer, lower quilibrium.
hat are the main counterarguments from free-trade/outsourcing dvocates, such as myself, who still believe that Ricardo is right?
To be in with, while there may be a transition phase in certain fields, during hich wages are dampened in developed countries, there is no reason to elieve that this dip will be permanent or across the board, as long as the lobal pie keeps growing.
To suggest that it will be permanent is to invoke  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he so-called lump of labor theorythe notion that there is a fixed lump f labor in the world and that once that lump is gobbled up, whether by mericans or Indians or Japanese, there won't be any more jobs to go round.
If we have the biggest lump of labor now, and then Indians offer o do this same work for less, they will get a bigger piece of the lump, and e will have less, or so this argument goes.
he main reason the lump of labor theory is wrong is that it is based n the assumption that everything that is going to be invented has been nvented, and that therefore economic competition is a zero-sum game,  fight over a fixed lump.
This assumption misses the fact that although obs are often lost in bulkto outsourcing or to offshoring or to new echnologies by big individual companies, and this loss tends to make eadlines, new jobs are also being created in fives, tens, and twenties bysmall companies that you can't see.
It often takes a leap of faith to believe hat it is happening.
But it is happening.
If it were not, America's unem loyment rate would be much higher today than 4.5 percent.
The reason t is happening is that as lower-end service and manufacturing jobs move ut of Europe, America, and Japan to India, China, and the former oviet Empire, the global pie not only grows largerbecause more peo le have more income to spend it also grows more complex, as more ew jobs, and new specialties, are created.
et me illustrate this with a simple example.
Imagine that there are nly two countries in the worldAmerica and China.
And imagine that he American economy has only 100 people.
Of those 100 people, 80 are ell-educated knowledge workers and 20 are less-educated low-skilled orkers.
Now imagine that the world goes flat and America enters into a ree-trade agreement with China, which has 1,000 people but is a less de eloped country.
So today China too has only 80 well-educated knowl dge workers out of that 1,000, and it has 920 low-skilled workers.
Before merica entered into its free-trade agreement with China, there were nly 80 knowledge workers in its world.
Now there are 160 in our twocountry world.
The American knowledge workers feel like they have ore competition, and they do.
But if you look at the prize they are go ng after, it is now a much expanded and more complex market.
It went rom a market of 100 people to a market of 1,100 people, with many  M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E ore needs and wants.
So it should be win-win for both the American nd Chinese knowledge workers.
ure, some of the knowledge workers in America may have to move orizontally into new knowledge jobs, because of the competition from hina.
But with a market that big and complex, you can be sure that new nowledge jobs will open up at decent wages for anyone who keeps up his r her skills.
So do not worry about our knowledge workers or the Chinese nowledge workers.
They will both do fine with this bigger market.
What do you mean, don't worry?"
you ask.
"How do we deal with the act that those eighty knowledge workers from China will be willing to ork for so much less than the eighty knowledge workers from America?
ow will this difference get resolved?"
t won't happen overnight, so some American knowledge workers may e affected in the transition, but the effects will not be permanent.
Here, ar ues Stanford new economy specialist Paul Romer, is what you need to un erstand: The wages for the Chinese knowledge workers were so low ecause, although their skills were marketable globally like those of their merican counterparts, they were trapped inside a stifled economy.
magine how little a North Korean computer expert or brain surgeon is paid nside that huge prison of a nation!
But as the Chinese economy opens up o the world and reforms, the wages of Chinese knowledge workers will rise p to American/world levels.
Ours will not go down to the level of a stifled, alled-in economy.
You can already see this happening in Bangalore, here competition for Indian software writers is rapidly pushing up their ages toward American/European levelsafter decades of languishing alaries while the Indian economy was closed.
This is why Americans hould be doing all they can to promote the gradual but sustained opening nd reform of the Indian and Chinese economiesbecause in the long erm overall wages will rise in a more open and productive world economy.
o worry, though, about the 20 low-skilled Americans, who now have o compete more directly with the 920 low-skilled Chinese.
One reason he 20 low-skilled Americans were paid a decent wage before was that, elative to the 80 skilled Americans, there were not that many of them.
very economy needs some low-skilled manual labor.
But now that hina and America have signed their free-trade pact, there are a total of  H E W O R L D IS F L A T 40 low-skilled workers and 160 knowledge workers in our two-country orld.
Those American low-skilled workers doing fungible jobsjobs hat can easily be moved to Chinawill have a problem.
There is no enying this.
Their wages are certain to be depressed.
In order to main ain or improve their living standards, they will have to move vertically, ot horizontally.
They will have to upgrade their education and upgrade heir knowledge skills so that they can occupy one of the new jobs sure to e created in the much expanded United States-China market.
(In the oming chapters I will discuss our society's need and obligation to ensure hat everyone gets a chance to acquire those skills.)
s Romer notes, we know from the history of our own country that an ncrease in knowledge workers does not necessarily lead to a decrease in heir pay the way it does with low-skilled workers.
From the 1960s to the 980s, the supply of college-educated workers grew dramatically, and yet heir wages grew even faster.
Because as the pie grew in size and com lexity, so too did people's wants, and this increased the demand for eople able to do complex work and specialized tasks.
Romer explains his in part by the fact that "there is a difference between idea-based oods and physical goods."
If you are a knowledge worker making and elling some kind of idea-based productconsulting or financial ser ices or music or software or marketing or design or new drugsthe big er the market is, the more people there are out there to whom you can ell your product.
And the bigger the market, the more new specialties nd niches it will create.
If you come up with the next Windows or iagra, you can potentially sell one to everyone in the world.
So ideabased workers do well in globalization, and fortunately America as a hole has more idea-driven workers than any other country in the world.
ut if you are selling manual laboror a piece of lumber or a slab of teelthe value of what you have to sell does not necessarily increase hen the market expands, and it may decrease, argues Romer.
There are nly so many factories that will buy your manual labor, and there are any more people selling it.
What the carpenter or nanny has to sell can e bought by only one factory or one family at a time, explains Romer, hile what the software writer or drug inventor has to sellidea-based roductscan be sold to everyone in the global market at once.
M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E hat is why America, as a whole, will do fine in a flat world with free radeprovided it continues to churn out knowledge workers who are ble to produce idea-based goods that can be sold globally and who are ble to fill the knowledge jobs that will be created as we not only expand he global economy but connect all the knowledge pools in the world to ether.
There may be a limit to the number of good factory jobs in the orld, but there is no limit to the number of idea-generated jobs in the orld.
If we go from a world in which there were fifteen drug companies nd fifteen software companies in America (thirty in all) and two drug ompanies and two software companies in China (four in all) to a world n which there are thirty drug and software companies in America and hirty drug and software companies in China, it is going to mean more nnovation, more cures, more niches to specialize in, more new products o customize to individuals or markets, and many more people with igher incomes to buy those products.
The pie keeps growing because things that look like wants today are eeds tomorrow," argued Marc Andreessen, the Netscape cofounder, who elped to ignite a whole new industry, e-commerce, that now employs mil ions of specialists around the world, specialists whose jobs weren't even magined when Bill Clinton became president.
I like going to coffee shops ccasionally, but now that Starbucks is here, I need my coffee, and that ew need has spawned a whole new industry.
I always wanted to be able to earch for things, but once Google was created, I must have my search en ine.
So a whole new industry has been built up around search, and oogle is hiring math Ph.D.'s by the bushelbefore Yahoo!
or Microsoft ires them.
People are always assuming that everything that is going to be nvented must have been invented already.
But it hasnt.
If you believe human wants and needs are infinite," said Andreessen, then there are infinite industries to be created, infinite businesses to be tarted, and infinite jobs to be done, and the only limiting factor is human magination.
The world is flattening and rising at the same time.
And I hink the evidence is overwhelmingly clear: If you look over the sweep of istory, every time we had more trade, more communications, we had a ig upswing in economic activity and standard of living."
merica integrated a broken Europe and Japan into the global econ-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T my after World War II, with both Europe and Japan every year upgrading heir manufacturing, knowledge, and service skills, often importing and ometimes stealing ideas and equipment from the United States, just as merica did from Britain in the late 1770s.
Yet in the sixty years since orld War II, our standard of living has increased every decade, and our nemployment rate even with all the outcry about outsourcingstands t only a little above 5 percent, roughly half that of the most developed ountries in Western Europe.
We just started a company that created 180 new jobs in the middle f a recession," said Andreessen, whose company, Opsware, uses au omation and software to replace human beings in the operation of huge erver farms in remote locations.
By automating these jobs, Opsware en bles companies to save money and free up talented brainpower from elatively mundane tasks to start new businesses in other areas.
You hould be afraid of free markets, argued Andreessen, only if you believe hat you will never need new medicines, new work flow software, new in ustries, new forms of entertainment, new coffeehouses, and only if you elieve that your country's citizens will never be able to develop the nowledge skills to fill the jobs these new industries or business models ill spin off.
Yes," he concluded, "it takes a leap of faith, based on economics, to ay there will be new things to do."
But there always have been new jobs o do, and there is no fundamental reason to believe the future will be ifferent.
ome 150 years ago, 90 percent of Americans worked in agriculture nd related fields, driving plows pulled by horses and harvesting crops by and.
Today, due to the industrialization of agriculture, we need less han 3 percent of the population to grow all our food and more.
What if ong ago the government had decided to protect and subsidize all those anual agricultural jobs and refused to embrace mechanized and even ually computerized agriculture?
Hey, if horses could have voted, there ever would have been cars.
Would America as a whole be better off to ay?
Hardly.
Of course, it is true that as Indians and Chinese move up he value chain and start producing more knowledge-intensive goods he sorts of things Americans have specialized in our comparative ad-  M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E antage in some of these areas will diminish, explains Jagdish Bhagwati, he Columbia University expert on free trade.
There will be a downward ressure on wages in certain fields, and some of the jobs in those fields ay permanently migrate abroad.
That is why some knowledge workers ill have to move horizontally.
But the growing pie will surely create ew specialties for them to fill, and new areas of comparative advantage, hat are impossible to predict right now.
It all depends on how many new ervices or products we can imagine.
And, as I said, there is just no limit o that.
or instance, there was a time when America's semiconductor industry ominated the world, but then companies from other countries came long and gobbled up the low end of the market.
Some even moved into he higher end.
American companies were then forced to find newer, eeper specialties in the expanded market.
If that weren't happening, Intel ould be out of business today.
Instead, it is thriving.
Paul Otellini, Intel's resident, told The Economist (May 8, 2003) that as chips become good nough for certain applications, new applications pop up that demand ore powerful and more complex chips, which are Intel's specialty.
s Google, Yahoo!, and Microsoft start offering video searches, for in tance, there will be demand for new devices and the chips that power hem, things most of us couldn't have imagined possible ten years ago.
his process takes time to unfold.
But it will, argued Bhagwati, because hat is happening in services today is the same thing that happened in anufacturing as trade barriers were lowered.
In manufacturing, said hagwati, as the global market expanded and more and more players ame onto the field, you saw greater and greater "intraindustry trade."
So exico specialized in making tires and China specialized in making amshafts and America specialized in overall automobile design.
As we ove into the knowledge economy, you are now seeing more and more intraservice trade," with more and more slices of specialization emerg ng within different service sectors as they grow more complex.
o Mom and Dad, don't be surprised if your kid comes home from col ege one day and announces that he or she wants to be a "search engine ptimizer."
Yes, you will be tempted to respond, "Wait one minute.
I sent ou to college to be a doctor or a lawyer!
What the hell is a search engine  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ptimizer?
Why couldn't you be an ophthalmologist like your uncle ouie?"
But don't succumb to such words.
Search engine optimizer is ust one of those new specialties emerging in the flat world.
Here's how: et's say there are two giant suitcase companies in the world"Tom's uitcases" and "Samsonite."
It can mean millions of dollars in profits if, hen someone searches for "suitcase" on Google, Tom's Suitcases omes up before Samsonite on Google or Microsoft's first page of search esults.
More people will likely click on Tom's Suitcases, and because he people who click through to a Web site are those most likely to buy, om's Suitcases will enjoy the majority of business.
What search engine ptimizers (SEOs as they are called in the trade) do is constantly study he algorithms being used by the major search engines to produce their earch results, and then try to design marketing and Web strategies that ill push your company up the rankings.
The SEOs are such algorithm uffs that they are known as "algoholics."
Their business involves a syn hesis of math and marketinga whole new specialty created entirely by he flattening of the world.
Remember the days when you used to ask our friend who was majoring in math, "What are you going to do with hat?"
Well, don't ask anymore.
earch engine optimizing has become such a big business that Google ow holds an annual dance party at its headquarters for all the SEOs trying o break its code.
On August 20, 2005, the Associated Press ran a story de cribing the Google Dance: "Free-flowing beer, live music, karaoke and ar ade games kept the party raging at the Googleplex the other night, but the eal action was unfolding inside a sterile conference room at Google Inc. eadquarters.
That's where the cunning Internet entrepreneurs who con tantly try to manipulate Google's search engine results for a competitive dge were trying to make the most of a rare opportunity to match wits faceto-face with the company's top engineers.
Google's code-talking experts, espite putting on a show of being helpful, weren't about to reveal their secret sauce'  Google's tightly guarded formula for ranking Web sites... he efforts to outsmart Google gall some Webmasters such as Shari hurow, who says the best way to increase a site's search engine ranking s to offer valuable content and products."
here is nothing about the flat world that makes obsolete Ricardo's ba-  M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E ic insight about comparative advantage nothing at all.
What is new is ow developed and developing countries will define their comparative dvantage in a flat worldwhat new and old services and industries their ompanies and individuals will choose to specialize in at any given time.
his is where the new challenge will arise.
It would appear that in a flat er world a country can and will lose its comparative advantage in one ield much more quickly than in the round world.
It is obvious, for in tance, that countries like India and China can now compete in many ore fieldsfields that were once seen as the exclusive preserve of de eloped Western nations.
These developed Western countries will need o adapt, and move into still newer fields, much more quickly, if they ant to maintain their standards of living.
At the same time, as India and hina develop, they will lose their comparative advantage in certain ower-rung fields, like basic manufacturing or textiles, to places like Viet am or Madagascar.
No country is immune to these economic laws of ravity.
The good news for America, though, as I have tried to suggest, is hat in the flat world there also will be an inexorable flow of new jobs, as hole new fields of endeavor are spun off faster and fasterjobs that ed cated Americans and Europeans should be able to specialize in, like earch engine optimizing.
And, at the same time, there will be an inex rable flow of jobs from the developed world to the developing world, as hese new jobs regularly become commoditized and more easily trad bleand therefore advantageous to do in India or China.
nd still at the same time, thanks to the ten flatteners, more and ore jobs will be broken apart, with the more sophisticated tasks being one in the developed world and the less sophisticated tasks in the de eloping worldwhere each has its comparative advantage.
And you ill start to see more innovations emerging from China and India, with ome of the production, design, and marketing being outsourced to the est, where, yes, we still may have some comparative advantage.
You re going to see all of these thingsall at once.
But as long as the pie eeps growing and getting more complex, and as long as the individuals n your country keep adding to that pie by imagining new services and roducts in which to specialize, and as long as those individuals keep ducating themselves and developing the skills needed to master these  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ew jobs, workers in India, China, Europe, and America can all do ell at the same time.
lways remember: The Indians and Chinese are not racing us to the bot om.
They are racing us to the topand that is a good thing!
They want igher standards of living, not sweatshops; they want brand names, not unk; they want to trade in their motor scooters for cars, and their pens nd pencils for computers.
And the more they do that, the higher they limb, the more room is created at the top because the more they ave, the more they spend, the more diverse product markets become, nd the more niches for specialization are created as well.
Look at what s happening already: As American companies send knowledge work to ndia, Indian companies are turning around and using their earnings nd insights to start inventing new products that poorer Indians can use o lift themselves out of poverty into the middle class, where they will urely become consumers of American products.
Both China and ndia are rapidly developing from a focus on low-cost production and opying to a focus on low-cost innovation of their own.
They need to ind innovative and affordable ways to solve their own problemsand hey are doing just that.
And once they perfect some of these affordable olutions in their own markets a medical insurance program in India hat covers the poor for as little as $10 a year, cheap laptops, supercheap cell phones, and even a low-fare Indian airline ($75 one-way or the three-hour Bangalore to Delhi flight) that sells tickets from nternet kiosks in gas stationsthey will take them global.
BusinessWeek October 11, 2004) cited the Tata Motors factory, near Pune, south of umbai, "where a group of young designers, technicians, and marketers ore over drawings and examine samples of steel and composite plas ics.
By early next year, they plan to design a prototype for Tata Group's ost ambitious project yet: a compact car that will sell for $2,200.
The ompany hopes the car will beat out Suzuki's $5,000 Maruti compact o become India's cheapest carand an export model for the rest of the eveloping world.
'This is the need of the day in India a people's car,' ays Ratan Tata, chairman of the $12.5 billion Tata Group.
Indians are ncreasingly demanding better products and services at an affordable ost.
Strong economic growth this year will only enlarge that demand.
M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E he phrase 'Made in India' may come to represent innovation in the ew global economy."
aghuram Rajan, the director of research for the International onetary Fund, sits on the board of HeyMath.com, a very innovative ndian education company that puts Indian students to work over the nternet tutoring students in Singapore and elsewhere, and also em loys Indian, British, and Chinese experts to help HeyMath design the est ways to teach various math and science concepts to young people n grades K-12.
In working with public schools in Singapore, and now ven in the United States, HeyMath provides teachers with lesson lans, PowerPoint presentations, online homework packets, and other azzy ways for them to teach math and science.
This saves teachers ime, which they can then use to customize certain lessons just for heir class or spend more time with one-on-one interactions.
HeyMath, eadquartered in Chennai, India, is paid for by the schools in Sin apore and elsewhere.
But Cambridge University in England is also art of this equation, providing the overall quality controls and certify ng the lesson plans and teaching methods.
Everyone wins," says Rajan.
"The company is run by two Indians who orked for Citibank and CSFB in London and came back to India to start his business... Cambridge University is making money from a company hat has created a whole new niche.
The Indian students are making ocket money.
And the Singapore students are learning better."
Mean hile, the underlying software is probably being provided by Microsoft nd the chips by Intel, and the enriched Indian students are probably buy ng cheap personal computers from Apple, Dell, or HP.
But you cant really ee any of this.
"The pie grew, but no one saw it," said Rajan.
No one any here lost a job because HeyMath went into business, but lots of people in ll different places got jobs that did not existfiveyears ago.
n essay in the McKinsey Quarterly, "Beyond Cheap Labor: Lessons or Developing Economies" (January 2005), offers a nice example of ompanies and countries moving from one comparative advantage to nother: "In northern Italy's textile and apparel industry .
the majority f garment production has moved to lower-cost locations, but employ ent remains stable because companies have put more resources into  H E W O R L D IS F L A T asks such as designing clothes and coordinating global production etworks."
t is so easy to demonize free marketsand the freedom to outsource nd offshorebecause it is so much easier to see people being laid off in ig bunches, which makes headlines, than to see them being hired in ives and tens by small and medium-size companies, which rarely makes ews.
But occasionally a newspaper tries to dig deep into the issue.
My ometown paper, the Minneapolis Star Tribune, did just that.
It looked at xactly how the Minnesota economy was being affected by the flattening f the world, actually daring to run an article on September 5, 2004, eadlined, "Offshore Jobs Bring Gains at Home."
The article, datelined uxi, China, began like this: "Outside the air is dank, dusty and hot as ropical fever.
Inside, in an environment that's dry, spotless and cool, hun reds of former farm laborers covered head to toe in suits looking like omething out of NASA are performing work for Bloomington-based onaldson Co.
I n c .
In Donaldson's case, the company has twice as any workers in China2,500as the 1,100 it has in Bloomington.
The hinese operation not only has allowed Donaldson to keep making a roduct it no longer could make at a profit in the United States, it also has elped boost the company's Minnesota employment, up by 400 people ince 1990.
Donaldson's highly paid engineers, chemists and designers in innesota spend their days designing updated filters that the Chinese lant will make for use in computers, MP3 players and digital video ecorders.
The falling disk-drive prices made possible by Chinese pro uction are feeding demand for the gadgets.
I f we didn't follow [the rend], we'd be out of business,' said David Timm, general manager of onaldson's disk-drive and microelectronics unit.
In Minnesota, Global nsight estimates that 1,854 jobs were created as a result of foreign out ourcing in 2003.
By 2008, the firm expects nearly 6,700 new jobs in innesota as a consequence of the trend."
conomists often compare China's and India's entry into the global conomy to the moment when the railroad lines crossing America fi ally connected New Mexico to California, with its much larger popula ion.
"When the railroad comes to town," noted Vivek Paul, the Wipro resident, "the first thing you see is extra capacity, and all the people in  M E R I C A AND F R E E T R A D E ew Mexico say those peopleCalifornianswill wipe out all our fac ories along the line.
That will happen in some areas, and some compa ies along the line will go out of business.
But then capital will get eallocated.
In the end, everyone along the line will benefit.
Sure, there s fear, and that fear is good because that stimulates a willingness to hange and explore and find more things to do better."
t happened when we connected New York, New Mexico, and alifornia.
It happened when we connected Western Europe, America, nd Japan.
And it will happen when we connect India and China with merica, Europe, and Japan.
The way to succeed is not by stopping the ailroad line from connecting you, but by firing up your imagination, by pgrading your skills, and by adopting those practices, rules, policies, nd educational institutions that will enable you and your society to laim a healthy slice of the bigger but more complex pie.
IX he Untouchables inding the New Middle   the flattening of the world is largely (but not entirely) unstoppable, nd if it holds out the potential to be as beneficial to American soci ty in general as past market evolutions have been, how does an in ividual get the best out of it?
What do we tell our kids?
y simple answer is this: There will be plenty of good jobs out here in the flat world for people with the right knowledge, skills, ideas, nd self-motivation to seize them.
But there is no sugar-coating the ew challenge: Every young American today would be wise to think of imself or herself as competing against every young Chinese, Indian, nd Brazilian.
In Globalization 1.0, countries had to think globally to hrive, or at least survive.
In Globalization 2.0, companies had to think lobally to thrive, or at least survive.
In Globalization 3.0, individuals ave to think globally to thrive, or at least survive.
This requires not nly a new level of technical skills but also a certain mental flexibility, elf-motivation, and psychological mobility.
I am certain that we mericans can indeed thrive in this world.
But I am also certain that it ill not be as easy as it was in the last fifty years.
Each of us, as an indi idual, will have to work a little harder and run a little faster to keep our tandard of living rising.
Globalization went from globalizing industries to globalizing indi iduals," said Vivek Paul, the Wipro president.
"I think today that people orking in most jobs can sense how what they are doing integrates glob lly: 1 am working with someone in India.
I am buying from someone in hina.
I am selling to someone in England.'
As a result of the ability to HE U N T O U C H A B L E S ove work around, we have created an amazing awareness on the part of very individual that says: 'Not only does my work have to fit into some ody's global supply chain, but I myself have to understand how I need o compete and have the skill sets required to work at a pace that fits the upply chain.
And I had better be able to do that as well or better than nyone else in the world.'"
That sense of responsibility for one's own ad ancement runs deeper than ever today.
In many global industries now, ou have got to justify your job every day with the value you create and he unique skills you contribute.
And if you don't, that job can fly away arther and faster than ever.
n sum, it was never good to be mediocre in your job, but in a world f walls, mediocrity could still earn you a decent wage.
You could get by nd then some.
In a flatter world, you really do not want to be mediocre r lack any passion for what you do.
You don't want to find yourself in the hoes of Willy Loman in Death of a Salesman, when his son Biff dispels is idea that the Loman family is special by declaring, "Pop!
I'm a dime  dozen, and so are you!"
An angry Willy retorts, "I am not a dime a ozen!
I am Willy Loman, and you are Biff Loman!"
don't care to have that conversation with my girls, so my advice to hem in this flat world is very brief and very blunt: "Girls, when I was rowing up, my parents used to say to me, 'Tom, finish your dinner eople in China and India are starving.'
My advice to you is: Girls, finish our homeworkpeople in China and India are starving for your jobs."
nd in a flat world, they can have them, because in a flat world there is o such thing as an American job.
There is just a job, and in more cases han ever before it will go to the best, smartest, most productive, or heapest workerwherever he or she resides.
HE  EW IDDLE  is going to take more than just doing your homework to thrive in a flat orld, though.
You are going to have to do the right kind of homework s well.
Because the companies that are adjusting best to the flat world are  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ot just making minor changes, they are changing the whole model of the ork they do and how they do itin order to take advantage of the flatworld platform and to compete with others who are doing the same.
What his means is that students also have to fundamentally reorient what they re learning and educators how they are teaching it.
They can't just keep he same old model that worked for the past fifty years, when the world as round.
This set of issues is what I will explore in this and the next hapter: What kind of good middle-class jobs are successful companies nd entrepreneurs creating today?
How do workers need to prepare them elves for those jobs, and how can educators help them do just that?
et's start at the beginning.
The key to thriving, as an individual, in  flat world is figuring out how to make yourself an "untouchable."
hat's right.
When the world goes flat, the caste system gets turned up ide down.
In India, untouchables are the lowest social class, but in a lat world everyone should want to be an untouchable.
"Untouch bles," in my lexicon, are people whose jobs cannot be outsourced, dig tized, or automated.
And remember, as analyst David Rothkopf notes, ost jobs are not lost to outsourcing to India or Chinamost lost jobs re "outsourced to the past."
That is, they get digitized and automated.
he New York Times s Washington bureau used to have a telephone perator-receptionist.
Now it has a recorded greeting and voice mail.
hat reception job didn't go to India; it went to the past or it went to a icrochip.
The flatter the world gets, the more anything that can be igitized, automated, or outsourced will be digitized, automated, or utsourced.
As Infosys C E O Nandan Nilekani likes to say, in a flat orld there is "fungible and nonfungible work."
Work that can be eas ly digitized, automated, or transferred abroad is fungible.
One of the ost distinguishing features of the flat world is how many jobs not ust blue-collar manufacturing jobs but now also white-collar service obs  are becoming fungible.
Since more of us work in those service obs than ever before, more of us will be affected.
ave no illusions: We live in a world now where more and more hings are becoming tradable, Alan Blinder, the noted Princeton econ mist, argued in a very smart essay titled "Fear of Offshoring."
He xplained: HE UNTOUCHABLES t any point in time, the available technologyespecially trans ortation and communications technologieslargely determines hich goods and services are easy to trade internationally and which re hard or impossible to trade.
Simplifying this underlying reality, conomic theorists typically conceptualize the world's goods and ervices as falling into one of two bins: "tradable" or "non-tradable" what Nilekani calls fungible and nonfungible].
Traditionally, any tem that can be put in a box and shipped (roughly, manufactured oods) was considered tradable, while anything that cannot be put n a box (like services) or was too heavy for shipping (like cement) as thought of as non-tradable.
But that is now vestigial thinking.
ecause technology is constantly improving, and because ransportation seems to grow easier and cheaper over time, the oundary between what is tradable and what is not tradable is onstantly shifting... Over time, more and more things become radable.
In particular, boxes are simply not what they once were.
he old assumption that, if you can put it in a box, you can trade t, is now hopelessly obsolete .
Because packets of digitized in ormation can now play the role that boxes used to play, many ser ices are now tradable and many more will surely become so.
ndeed, let me make a bold prediction .
In the future, and to  great extent already in the present, the key distinction for interna ional trade will no longer be between things that can be put in a ox and things that cannot.
It will, instead, be between services that an be delivered electronically over long distances with little or no egradation of quality, and those that cannot.
The tradability of a ast array of services is, as they say, the New New Thing.
And there s little doubt that the fraction of services that can be delivered elec ronically will grow.
(Princeton University Center for Economic olicy Studies Working Paper No.
119, December 2005.)
o if that is the direction of the global economy, who will the un ouchables be?
What jobs are not likely to become fungible, easy to utomate, digitize, or outsource?
I would argue that the untouchables in  flat world will fall into three broad categories.
First are people who are  H E W O R L D IS F L A T eally "special or specialized."
This label would apply to Michael Jordan, adonna, Elton John, J. K. Rowling, your brain surgeon, and the top ancer researcher at the National Institutes of Health.
These people per orm functions in ways that are so special or specialized that they can ever be outsourced, automated, or made tradable by electronic transfer.
hey are untouchables.
They have a global market for their goods and ervices and can command global wages.
econd are people who are really "localized" and "anchored."
This cat gory includes many, many people.
They are untouchables because their obs must be done in a specific location, either because they involve some pecific local knowledge or because they require face-to-face, personalized ontact or interaction with a customer, client, patient, colleague, or audi nce.
All these people are untouchables because they are anchored: my arber, the waitress at lunch, the chefs in the kitchen, the plumber, nurses, y dentist, lounge singers, masseurs, retail sales clerks, repairmen, electri ians, nannies, gardeners, cleaning ladies, and divorce lawyers.
Note that hese people can be working in high-end jobs (divorce lawyer, dentist), vo ational jobs (plumber, carpenter), or low-end jobs (garbage collector, aid).
Regardless of that worker's level of sophistication, their wages will be et by the local market forces of supply and demand.
hat then brings me to the third broad category.
This category in ludes people in many formerly middle-class jobsfrom assembly line ork to data entry to securities analysis to certain forms of accounting nd radiologythat were once deemed nonfungible or nontradable and re now being made quite fungible and tradable thanks to the ten flat eners.
Let's call these the "old middle" jobs.
Many of them are now un er pressure from the flattening of the world.
As Nandan Nilekani puts it: The problem [for America] is in the middle.
Because the days when ou could count on being an accounts-payable clerk are gone.
And a lot f the middle class are where that [old] middle is .
This middle has not et grasped the competitive intensity of the future.
Unless they [do], they ill not make the investments in reskilling themselves and you will end p with a lot of people stranded on an island."
ome are noticing, though.
They are noticing that the rising threats f a machine or a worker from India taking their jobs have left them with HE UNTOUCHABLES tagnating wages even though they are more productive and their com anies more profitable.
ow does it all work in real life?
The Financial Times (November 2, 006) explained: "Jack Drake understands better than most Americans ow strongly the U.S. economy has performed over recent years.
His job ith a media company in Atlanta involves transcribing conference calls osted by public companies to deliver financial information to analysts nd investors.
'Almost every day, I listen to chief executives explaining ow well their companies are doing/ he says.
But Mr. Drake, 42, com lains that the soaring corporate profits and robust economic growth he elps document are not reflected in his own financial circumstances.
is $47,000 annual salary has barely moved for five years.
'Healthcare osts are up.
Energy is up.
But my income is standing still.'
Mr. Drake is mong millions of educated middle-class Americans seeing their pay tagnate and blaming that on technology and globalization.
'It would be ard to outsource my job because there is so much specialist knowledge nd business jargon involved/ he says.
'But it is used as an unspoken hreat to keep wages down.'"
hat to do?
One thing is to make sure we take the full picture into ccount.
Yes, it is true that median wages are stagnating for white-collar orkers in developed countries.
But it is also true that those workers can uy so many more things with those wages, because prices are falling hanks to the same globalization that is pinching their salaries.
China's olding of about $1 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities and dollars, at very ow interest rates, has kept American interest rates down, enabling many mericans to buy homes with extremely cheap mortgages.
Thanks to lobalization, they can also buy flat-screen TVs, cell phones, computers, hoes, clothing, and cars at ever lower prices.
It is not only wages that are ffected by globalization but prices as well.
hat said, our ability to keep global integration advancing will depend n workers at all levels feeling that globalization and free trade have more ositive than negative effects on their lives as a wholethat they enable hem not just to buy cheap DVDs but also educate their kids and afford ealth care for their families the way that middle-class parents could in he past.
Stagnating middle-class wages and rising job insecurity, coupled  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ith soaring executive pay, are a bad combination.
And a lecture on the isdom of Ricardo will not satisfy people who are caught in this squeeze.
verage Americans historically never resented the rich as long as they felt hey too had a fair chance to get rich or advance.
So if too many feel left ut, it could shake America's vaunted political stability.
he U.S. economy used to look like a bell curve, with a big bulge n the middle.
That bulge of middle-class jobs has been the foundation ot only of our economic stability but of our political stability as well.
emocracy cannot be stable without a broad and deep middle class.
We annot afford to move from a bell curve economy to a barbell economy ith a big high end and a bigger low end and nothing in the middle.
t would be economically unfair and politically unstable.
As former linton national economic adviser Gene Sperling rightly argues, "We ei her grow together or we will grow apart."
o I repeat: What to do?
Obviously, we need to make sure our tax sys em is fair, but I will leave that for others to detail.
Equally obvious to me s that putting up walls is not the answer.
We don't want to choke off the ery openness and flexibility of the American economy that make it so nique.
We want to enable more American workers to be able to take art in that openness, to derive its benefits and remain part of a flourish ng middle class or move up into it.
The demand and payoff for skilled, ducated workers who can adapt to rapid technological change, respond o international competition, and claim new middle jobs is greater than ver today.
"In 1979, median compensation for college graduates was 8% higher than for high school graduates.
Last year, that difference was 5%" (BusinessWeek, February 9, 2007).
herefore, of the many things we need to do, in my view the most im ortant is to identify the new middle jobs that will be less vulnerable to he downward wage pressures of outsourcing, automation, and techno ogical change and to identify the particular skills and education they ill demandso that more weakers can reap the benefits.
In the United tates, new middle jobs are coming into being all the time; that is why e don't have large-scale unemployment, despite the flattening of the orld.
But to acquire and hold one of these new middle jobs you need ertain skills that are suited to the flat worldskills that can make you HE UNTOUCHABLES at least temporarily) special, specialized, or anchored, and therefore (at east temporarily) untouchable and more likely to reap rising wages.
HE EW IDDLERS   order to identify those jobs and those skills, I worked backward.
I ent out to successful flat-world companies around America and sked a simple question: "Obviously you have a lot of good middle-class obs here.
Who works here and what sorts of things do they do?"
What ollows is a general list of categories that many new middle jobs will fall nto, or grow out of, and the skill sets they require.
To put it another way, ere is what the "Help Wanted" ads look like in a flat world.
REAT OLLABORATORS ND O R C H E S T R A T O R S learly, a lot of new middle jobs will involve collaborating with others or rchestrating collaboration within and between companies, especially hose employing diverse workforces from around the world.
So as more nd more companies start out, from day one, as global companies with lobal supply chains, a key new middle job will be that of the manager ho can work in and orchestrate 24/7/7 supply chainswhich are supply hains that run twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, across seven ontinents.
first started to realize this in the summer of 2005 when I took my aughter Orly to Bangalore, where she volunteered as a teacher in a chool outside of town.
One day she joined me on a visit to my friends at nfosys.
When we arrived at the Infosys headquarters, a spokeswoman ave us a tour of the building.
As we walked through the halls, she said to e in passing, "Our interns heard that you were going to be here today nd asked if you would come and speak to them."
ure, I said, I'd love to speak to the interns.
I always love interacting ith these young Indians.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T No, no," she said.
"It's our American interns."
You have American interns at Infosys?!"
hey sure did, she told me.
For its one hundred internship positions hat summer, Infosys received about 9,000 applications, primarily from orth America, China, France, and Germany.
I asked one of these interns, icki Chen, a Chinese-American business student from the Claremont olleges in California, why she had sought out an internship in Banga ore. "All the business is coming to India, and I don't see why I shouldn't ollow the business," she said.
"If this is where the center of gravity is, you hould go check it out, and then you become more valuable."
s Infosys C E O Nilekani pointed out to me, even though Infosys is ne of the biggest outsourcing firms in the world headquartered in angalore, "30 percent of our employees are outside of India, around the orld"working at the front end, soliciting new business, implement ng new software, and servicing existing accounts.
"There will be a lot of ood jobs that will involve being at the front end of this new global col aboration model," said Nilekani.
"Suppose you are working for a big harma company and it starts doing a lot more research in India.
You ill need people to talk to the FDA in Washington and deal with the lo al marketplace.
There is always a local phase to this global process."
hese new middle collaboration jobs will be in sales, marketing, main enance, and management, but what they will all demand is the ability o be a good horizontal collaborator, comfortable working for a global ompany (one whose headquarters may be in Beijing or Bangalore, not oston), and translating its services for the local market, wherever that ay be.
It is about being able to operate in, mobilize, inspire, and man ge a multidimensional and multicultural workforce.
lthough good people skills were always an asset in the working orld, they will be even more so in a flat world, because many more roducts will be made in global supply chains, many new middle jobs ill involve making supply chains more efficient.
"The more complex he globalized networks," says Carlota Perez, a Venezuelan-born expert n technology and socioeconomic development, who is best known for er detailed tracking of large technoeconomic paradigm shifts, "the ore [companies] will need various forms of coordination and manage- HE UNTOUCHABLES ent [around] specifications, compatibility, research and design, global arketing, distribution chains, data sharing and storage, and security."
here will be a lot of good new middle jobs along that chain.
eing a good collaborator or team leader will earn you a good new iddle job for another reason.
"We actually have no shortage of ideas," ays John Doerr, the Silicon Valley venture capitalist.
"What we are short s people who can execute them.
Everyone has this image of the lone en repreneur in a Silicon Valley garage.
In reality, it takes teams of people o win, to translate a new idea into a product."
And the more complex the roduct or service, the bigger the team.
That means, added Doerr, "that ou need people who can work well with others, and, even more impor antly, you need team leaders who know how to speak to people, to ex lain, and inspire."
People don't realize that the most important thing a enture capitalist does is not write a check to a start-up company.
The ost important thing a venture capitalist does, notes Doerr, is find the ight managerial talent to lead and inspire the start-up company so that t can grow to the next level.
HE REAT YNTHESIZERS he further we push out the boundaries of knowledge and innovation, he more the next great value breakthroughsthat is, the next new hotselling products and serviceswill come from putting together disparate hings that you would not think of as going together.
Search engine opti izing, for example, brings together mathematicians and marketing ex erts.
The next great breakthrough in bioscience is going to result from omputer engineers who can map the human genome working with harma companies that can turn these insights into life-saving drugs.
his synthesis is where the new jobs are going to emerge.
s I write this chapter, one of the hottest new businesses involves what s called "mash-ups," where you just mash together two different Webbased tools.
So, for instance, some local realtors might mash together raigslist with Google, which would mean matching up the local online irectory of everyone selling a house or renting an apartment in a  H E W O R L D IS F L A T articular town with Google's mapsinstantly producing a real estate ap that pinpoints every one of those houses and rental propertiesand s updated every second.
Can you bring an artist and clinical engineer together?"
Infosys chief perating officer S. "Kris" Gopalakrishnan asked me one day in Banga ore. "If the value comes from synthesizing, then you need synthesizers.
onventionally your approach to any problem or challenge was breaking t down to manageable bits and smaller parts, but today you are trying to reate value by synthesizing disparate parts together.
IBM used to make he chip, the computer, and the software, all vertically [all by itself].
But if ou look at Dell, it does very little design and manufacturing.
It brings all f the parts together from others and puts them in front of the customer.
Dell's] value is its ability to synthesize much better than everyone else.
ynthesizing it all together around consumer demand is the key .
So in n organization you need the dot people and the big-picture people [who an connect the dots].
And the change that is happening in India and at nfosys is that we are moving more into the capability of creating the syn hesis for the client.
We understand the trends in the industry and antici ate trends and come out with a synthesized solution."
eff Wacker, who works as the futurist for Electronic Data Systems orporation (EDS), once wrote a company memo predicting which obs would not be around in fifteen or twenty years.
Hisfirstcategory was he CIO.
"There will still be a CIO," he wrote, "but the chief informa ion officer will be replaced with a chief integration officer.
Information echnology will be so fully embedded in every aspect of a business that he IT organization will move away from technology to the integration of usiness processes."
HE REAT XPLAINERS he more we have good synthesizers, who can bring disparate things to ether, the more we will need managers, writers, teachers, producers, ournalists, and editors who are also good explainerswho can see the omplexity but explain it with simplicity.
Marcia Loughry is an enterprise HE UNTOUCHABLES rchitect who also works for EDS.
She is a classic example of a new middler for reasons that I will explain shortly.
One reason is that she learned ow to be a great explainer.
It is more important to be able to explain omething to someone else than to sit down and do the work yourself, he explained to me on a visit to EDS headquarters.
"I have fields of eople who can distribute software," she said, "but someone has to go in ront of that customer and explain: 'Here is what this is going to do for ou, here is how it will tie into your existing systems, here is how it will enefit you, and here is how much it will cost.'
" hink about it: If you can explain the complexity well, you can see the pportunities better.
For instance, you can see what parts to synthesize.
At he same time, the more content you can search and access, the more im ortant the filters and explainers become.
Amazon.corn's value is in not ust selling you the book for 30 percent off the cover price, but actually elping you sort through the ocean of books out there very quickly and asily so you find the books you might be interested in reading.
oward Freeman, fifty-three, owns a custom photography lab in spen, Colorado, called SlideMaster Photo-Imaging.
We met quite by ac ident.
He was my ski instructor.
Over lunch one day at the top of nowmass Mountain, he explained to me how his business was evolving, nd I explained to him, on the basis of what he explained to me, that he ad just entered the New Middle as a "Great Explainer."
Let me explain: hen Freeman started his business in 1977, he specialized in pro essing, duplicating, and making enlargements of slides taken by profes ional photographers, such as those on assignment for Architectural igest, or by advanced amateurs.
But thanks to the triple convergence, nd the rise of digital photography, the number of people shooting slide ilm, or any film, dramatically diminished.
s that business tapered off, Freeman found himself spending more ime every day explaining to customers how to operate a digital camera nd how to process and touch up film digitally, using computers.
Some ays, he told me, he would be exhausted by five p.m.yet realize that he ad not really gotten anything done on his core business.
He was spend ng all his time explaining to customers or his own employees the fine oints of digital photography and processing.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T o, Freeman recalled, one day he finally said to himself: "Since I am pending half my time explaining digital photography, I might as well ake it half my business."
In early 2006, he ripped out of his shop the big rint processors that he used to make enlargements of slides and replaced hem with a dozen computers (mostly Apple Macs), and an array of digi al printers.
He and his staff started using the computers not only for pro essing customers' digital photography, but, more important, to start a ew career as explainers.
They invited potential clients to come in during ffice hours or after and learnfor a feehow to do sophisticated digital hoto processing, retouching, and manipulation, using the latest com uter software.
They also offered to go out and teachat a client's home r office computing environmentso the information could be applied mmediately on the client's own digital photo systems.
We used to sell film and develop and print the picturesand give way the advice for free," explained Freeman.
"Now we are selling the ad ice and, while not giving away the products, they have become a smaller art of our business.
We are going to make explaining the business."
n light of that, Freeman told me he has had to think about his staff in ifferent ways.
The pure backroom technical person, who does not have ood people skills, might be less in demand.
And the good people person, ho might be just one chapter ahead of the clients in terms of under tanding digital photography, becomes more valuablebecause he or he is a really good explainer.
HE REAT EVERAGERS he man who invented information technology outsourcing is Ross erot, the fast-talkin' Texan who ran for president in 1992.
After his dis harge from the navy in 1957, Perot went to work as a salesman for IBM, here he identified what he thought was a unique business opportu ityusing downtime on one company's computers (back when com uters were uncommon and expensive) to do data processing for other ompanies.
Perot left IBM in 1962 and founded EDS to do just that, inning contracts from large corporations and eventually the U.S. gov- HE UNTOUCHABLES rnment.
This came to be known as business process outsourcing, and it as spread from Texas to Bangalore, thanks to the flattening of the world.
DS, which Perot sold in 1984, still does business process outsourcing odaycompeting with companies in India and across the world.
n November 2005 I visited the EDS campus in Piano, Texas, a mod rn grass, glass, and steel compound with a massive structure called the MC Systems Management Centerat the heart of it.
There is a iewing area for visitors, with seats like a home theater.
When you come n the curtains are closed and then suddenly they part, and laid out be ore you is a huge control room that looks like the NASA headquarters onitoring a moon shot.
There are seven massive wall-size screens, be ow them smaller T V screens, and below them about one hundred indi idual control pods with screens and dials in front of them.
Today only bout twenty of those pods have people sitting at their controls, because oday twenty people do the work that one hundred people did a decade go.
The only way EDS can compete with low-wage India is by having ne person work smarter and faster, rather than cheaper and harder.
hose twenty people can really leverage every drop out of every new echnology as soon as it appears.
aking in this scene, I had one question: Who are those twenty eople down there and how come they have not been automated or out ourced?
Here's what I learned: When the SMC was built, those one undred people worked in shifts with constant "eyes on glass," because hen you are running other people's data you cannot afford your com uter systems, or theirs, to be even 99.999 percent operational.
They ave to be working perfectly all the time, or else a whole company's usiness processes could crash.
So the SMC operators had to sit in those ods and constantly watch the information being spewed out on differ nt screens by the EDS computers processing the data for all sorts of cus omers.
You might see one thousand informational messages and then ne error message that you couldn't afford to miss.
ome of the people who worked in the SMC didn't have college de rees, let alone computing expertise.
EDS simply trained them to keep heir eyes on the glass and raise an alarm when an error message appeared.
o if you suddenly got a message "service unavailable," and the phone  H E W O R L D IS F L A T tarted ringing from the customer's headquarters, as an operator your job as to swivel around among four different screens and try to correlate all he information on all the screens and figure out the root cause of the prob em.
Was it the router?
Was it the server?
And two different operators would espond differently and come up with very different answers.
ver time, E D S was able to leverage more and more computing ower and identify the root cause of any problem automatically.
"Now he swivel chair is gone," my E D S guide explained, "and the screen sim ly has a message that says, 'The router has a problem.'
" That's great, you ight be saying to yourselfnow I need to be even less well-educated to et one of those twenty jobs.
But the opposite is true.
The really special r specialized jobs at EDS are held by those people who can leverage echnology, who can design precisely these computer programs that en ble others to work smarter and faster.
Those people are untouchables.
he new middle jobs at EDS, for now at least, are held by the people ho learn to operate these new programs.
What does that involve?
oday, the people sitting at the twenty pods are computer engineers, nd smart ones at that.
"The people we are looking for," explained the DS futurist Jeff Wacker, "are people who can not only catch a problem, ut quickly come up with a solution that willfixthe problem for good, so t will never happen again .
Not only do they catch the fish, they fillet t and they reseed the pond .
They see the problem, stop the problem, nd then redesign the system so that that particular problem never, ever appens againand it can't be a cowboy solution."
It has to follow a tandard protocol so that once you have fixed the problem and designed  better way of doing something, it is in a best-practice format that can be pplied throughout the E D S system or, better yet, sold to a customer.
Now we need people who have a better understanding of how things ie together from end to endbut the end to end is not just from our omputers to our customers' computers," said Wacker.
"Now the end to nd is our business and our customer's business and our customers' cus omers' businesses.
We have clients who may have clients who may serve ell's supply chain, so you have to have people who understand Dell nd how it meets its business objectives for its customers."
For instance, DS works for a Canadian lumber company.
To become more efficient, HE UNTOUCHABLES hat company needs to implement technology systems so that even be ore a tree is cut down the company knows whether it will be used for ulp or lumber, which mill will process it, which retailer will stock it, ven the precise size of each piece of lumber that will come from it and hich building, home, or office it will be used to build.
If EDS can help un the business processes of that Canadian company in a way that seam essly integrates the buildings that architects are designing into the mate ials contractors are buying into how that timber company cuts each tree, t will save everyone money, eliminate waste, lower transport costs, and ake everyone more profitable.
merica's long-term economic growth and standard of living have ong depended on leveraging technology as a way to compete with heaper foreign labor.
Our focus has always been on achieving such high evels of productivity that we can produce goods and services at competi ive prices and still pay our workers decent wages.
To pull that off, though, e have had to combine the best of what computers and telecommuni ations can offer with the best-trained workforce we can build, and then onstantly reintegrate the best practices and new skills being honed by hat workforce with the best new technologies to make the wholethe achines and the peoplemore and more productive.
There are lots of ew middle jobs in that loop if we can keep it going.
HE REAT DAPTERS he Gartner Group, the technology consultants, coined a term to de cribe the trend in the information technology world away from special zation and toward employees who are more adaptable and versatile.
It alls them "versatilists."
Building employee versatility and finding em loyees who already are or are willing to become versatilists "will be the ew watchword for career planning," according to a Gartner study quoted y TechRepublic.com.
The Gartner study noted that "speciajists gen rally have deep skills and narrow scope, giving them expertise that is ecognized by peers but seldom valued outside their immediate do ain.
Generalists have broad scope and shallow skills, enabling them to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T espond or act reasonably quickly but often without gaining or demon trating the confidence of their partners or customers.
Versatilists, in con rast, apply depth of skill to a progressively widening scope of situations nd experiences, gaining new competencies, building relationships, and ssuming new roles."
Versatilists are capable not only of constantly adapt ng but also of constantly learning and growing.
TechRepublic quoted Joe antana, director of training at Siemens Business Services: "With flat or ven smaller budgets and fewer people, managers need to make the most f the people they have .
They can no longer see people as specialty ools.
And their people need to become less like specialty tools and more ike Swiss Army knives.
Those 'Swiss Army knives' are the versatilists."
et's face it, my kids have very little chance of working for the same ompany for twenty-five years, as I have.
They have got to be adaptable wiss Army knives.
Gene Sperling, the former economic adviser to Presi ent Clinton and author of The Pro-Growth Progressive, also has a nice ay of expressing this.
He remarked to me that today's workers need to pproach the workplace much like athletes preparing for the Olympics, ith one difference.
"They have to prepare like someone who is training or the Olympics but doesn't know what sport they are going to enter," aid Sperling.
"They have to be ready to do anything."
f all that is true, then Marcia Loughry, the enterprise architect I met t E D S headquarters, is a gold medal Olympic adapter.
She epitomizes or me the person who has adapted her way into the new middlealways taying just one step ahead of the job-devouring forces of automation and utsourcing.
Sometimes I feel like it has been muddling instead of middling," re arked the good-natured forty-eight-year-old adapter, as she told me the tory of her remarkable career path at EDS.
"I started out in 1978.
I hought I wanted to be an accountant so I was in college at the University f North Texas, but I was impatient to get on with my life, so I [dropped out f college] and went to night school, learned how to type and take short and, and I got a job in the EDS word-processing center."
This was the ays before PCs, so Loughry worked on a simple word processor, typing ales reports.
After a few years, though, the PC came along on everyone's esk, and the sales reps typed their own reports.
Good-bye to that job.
HE UNTOUCHABLES So then I moved into mainframe and desktop publishing/' she ex lained.
"That was slightly more specialized and that involved format ing text, to prepare documents for publication using computers.
But hen the software got more advanced and people could do that for them elves."
Good-bye to that job.
fter that Loughry made a living for a short time helping E D S col eagues learn how to do desktop publishing themselves.
"I automated the ormatting process for people so they could publish their own docu ents," she said.
From there she took a job at the E D S call center and elp desk.
"I was there for only about a year, because while I was at the elp desk I realized that I would be a lot more successful at helping if I new more about the network that we were supporting," she recalled.
So I simply got up one day, put down my headset, and asked one of the op-tier people working in the SMC [Systems Management Center], am Billings, 'How can I learn what you do?
Sam, teach me.'
And he did.
e would let me observe what he was doing.
He'd reach under his desk nd pull out a manual and say, 'You need to know this.'
When he was roubleshooting a problem, he would take me over to a network diagram nd say, 'Let's use some logic here: You are getting a bunch of calls from eople who have this symptom.
What does it mean?
Connect the dots.'
" hile she was going through this phase, Loughry realized that she eeded to package and promote herself, and compete as an individual gainst other individuals, inside EDS.
"There were a lot of people who new about technology, so what was going to differentiate me or make me et that new job as opposed to someone else?"
she asked.
"I concluded hat I needed to keep constandy learning because there was always some hing new coming around the corner.
That's when I understood that I was Marcia, Incorporated.'
I concluded that I was solely responsible to [keep earning] by myself, that the resources were available, and that it was just  matter of me taking the initiative.
But I decided that I needed some cre entials."
At the time, EDS was using Novell Netware as its primary net ork operating system.
Loughry, studying on her own, got herself certified n that system.
On weekends, she would come in and just hang out with he engineers when they were rolling out a new server.
They were so willing to help me, I guess because they recognized the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T uriosity factor, so I got some practical hands-on experience," she recalled.
One day one of the managers called me and said, 'This Systems anagement Center is growing rapidly.'
He said he had five openings and  should pick one.
I picked Windows NT, Microsoft's Network Operating ystem, and I became one of the first NT server technicians in the SMC.
o I helped to develop a team of people who did that support... Then I tarted tagging around with some of the systems architects.
I was going to chool the whole time and switched over to Web-based courses.
I eventu lly moved into engineering."
Along the way, she also wrote a guidebook, ctive Directory for Dummies.
That, said Loughry, "was a calculated ove to try to raise my profile within EDS.
I needed to prove that there as more to me than just the eyes on glass technician, and I wanted to rove that I could compete with the big guys and breathe some of their are air.
Because to get to the highest job codes you have to publish, ini iate patents, and work on globally important projects."
Today, Marcia oughry has reached the second highest technology rung at EDS  nterprise architect.
oughry, a single mom, said her son is a marine reservist who re ently returned from a tour in Iraq.
"I tell him a lot, but I don't know if e is really listening," she says, like a good mom.
"The deep technical kills around math and science are going to get you in the door, but they re not what are going to keep you there or make you wildly successful.
he core competencies are [just] the entry-level requirements.
What will eep you there is developing a broader view.
Corporations are flattening s the world is flattening, and you have got to be able to see things from he business', the customers', and the market's perspective.
You can't just e head down, eyes on glass."
ooking down at each rung of the ladder that got her here, Loughry aid, they're all gone: "Every job I have done has to some degree been au omated or is being done [at least in part] by someone in India .
Maybe hat set me apart was sheer dogged determination.
I love to learn and there s so much available here to learn with."
But Loughry knows even enterprise rchitecture could easily be done from anywhere.
"I am not done adapt ngnot by a long shot," she said.
"Sam told me way back, 'Be an expert on HE UNTOUCHABLES hree topics, but know that those three topics will always be changing.'
So I ry to have something that is my core bread and butter right now, another opic closely associated with it, and then what I'm going to do next."
h, I forgot to mention, Marcia still does not have her B.A.she's een too busy adapting.
"Right now I am taking a geography course," she aid with a chuckle.
"I am close to having enough hours to graduate, but] so far all my finance and tech courses don't add up to a B.A."
HE REEN EOPLE hen three billion people from China, India, and the former Soviet mpire walk onto the flat-world platform in a very short period of time, nd every one of them wants a house, a car, a microwave, and a refrigera or, if we don't learn how to do more things with less energy and lower missions, we are going to create an environmental disaster and make our lanet unlivable for our children.
So there are going to be a lot of jobs in olving the words "sustainable" and "renewable" renewable energies nd environmentally sustainable systems.
This is going to be a huge in ustry in the twenty-first century.
As Carlota Perez puts it, "The more hina, India, and other developing or ex-Socialist countries industrialize, he bigger the environmental problems and the larger the market to pre ent, moderate, or overcome them will be."
Not only will the further de elopment of these big countries generate the need for these industries, dded Perez, "but also stringent global regulation will create the condi ions for them to emerge."
teve Jurvetson, the venture capitalist and innovator who has focused ecently on the idea of clean tech investing, talks about what he hopes ill be a "biological renaissance"a new era in which college students, nstead of becoming doctors, might instead focus on "bio-derived or bioinspired" solutions to our looming energy and environmental problems.
here are going to be a lot of jobs there, too.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T HE ASSIONATE ERSONALIZERS nn and I share season tickets to the Baltimore Orioles with friends.
As nyone who attends games at Camden Yards knows, there is a guy there ho sells lemonade in the lower deck who has perfected a dance routine round how he shakes and prepares the lemonade.
He does a little jig nd then high-fives you before he hands you the drink.
I love to watch im operate because all he is selling is water with sugar and a lemon in  plastic cup.
It couldn't be more of a commodity.
It couldn't be a more anilla job.
Yet I always notice that by the end of the game he is carrying round a wad of bills and tipsthat is thicker than that of any other endor I see.
Why?
Because he took a simple vanilla task and gave it a ersonal touch his own chocolate sauce, whipped cream, and cherry n topthat made him special.
I could get lemonade from plenty of endors.
I could also drink Coke or water, and he knows it.
But I and oth rs often shell out $3.50 (plus a tip) for his sugar water with lemon be ause it both quenches my thirst and puts a smile on my face.
His omething extra gives me something extra.
ow, the lemonade man was already an untouchable in the sense hat his job was anchored in Baltimore.
He was providing a localized ser ice that could not be done as well by a machine or a person in India  ecause he was delivering lemonade to my seat so I wouldn't miss a itch.
I would argue, however, that he made himself something more, he levated himself into the better-paying new middle, by adding a per onal, intangible dimension to his vanilla work.
In April 2006,1 went to he Orioles' opening-day game.
I scanned the stadium for this lemonade an, wanting to tell him that I had written about him.
When I told my osts whom I was looking for, one of them said, "Haven't you heard?
He ow rents himself out for private parties."
He had developed a whole new ide business and even handed out advertising brochures at the game!
Is his a great country, or what?
ometimes this personal dimension is pure passion, sometimes it is ure entertainment, sometimes it is a creative touch that no one else hought of addingbut in every case it takes a routine task and upgrades HE UNTOUCHABLES t into a new middle job.
There is an elderly African-American woman ho serves coffee at the Caribou Coffee outlet near my office on K Street n Washington.
Every time I am there, she goes out of her way to be help ul and ask me about myselfnot in a phony, overtrained way, like the taff at a Ritz-Carlton, but in a sincere way that I find charming.
So I go ut of my way to get my coffee from her.
One day, they're going to make er the managerif she isn't the manager already.
nyone who can take an old middle service job from telephone perator to health-care provider to service workers of all types to office eceptionistand give it something personal, something special, some eal passion, will have a good chance of turning it into a new middle job hat cannot be outsourced, automated, or digitized.
Obviously, some ervices have to be delivered personally, like those provided by a nurse.
thers, however, will have to be delivered depending only on your abil ty to endow them with a personal, passionate touch.
Interestingly, the rinceton economist Alan Blinder argues in his paper on outsourcing hat because so many new middle jobs will require this kind of personal ouch, it may actually produce a revival in human interactive skills, kills that have atrophied to some degree because of the industrial age nd the Internet.
The renewed stress on personally delivered services, y humans, as opposed to impersonally delivered services by computergenerated voices or voices from India, writes Blinder, "may lead to just he opposite of the phenomena that Charlie Chaplin parodied so effec ively in Modern Times.
Human beings are social animals who enjoy hu an contact.
In many past decades, it looked as if modern economic ife were conspiring to minimize the volume of natural human contact hat takes place on the job.
In future decades, as personal services come o be more predominant, that trend seems likely to reversepossibly eading to less alienation and greater average job satisfaction."
ndeed, adds Blinder, "Perhaps, contrary to what we have come to be ieve in recent years, people skills will become more valuable than com uter skills.
The geeks may not inherit the earth after all."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T ATH OVERS ne by-product of the fact that the PC enables all of us to become au hors of our own content in digital formwhether it is words, spread heets, data, photos, blogs, music, or videois that more and more of hat we design, what we write, what we buy, what we sell, and what we nvent is built on a foundation of math.
How so?
When words were just hapes or letters or musical notes on paper, there was only so much you ould do with them.
But once words or pictures or data or music of any ind could be digitizedthat is, formatted in combinations of Is and smath could be used to search all this content for patterns, and to ix, match, and manipulate it in wholly new ways.
This creates so many ore opportunities to apply math to more stuff.
And in a flat world, here getting a jump on your competitors by just a few weeks can make n enormous financial difference, those who can come up with the right athematical formulas, and apply them, to get that jump will be more aluable than ever.
It is all about math now," said Infosys C E O Nandan Nilekani.
Whether it is the search engine guys, or the Goldman Sachs guys, verything is boiling down to who can make those complex computa ions to get that little edge, to be just two weeks ahead of everyone else."
he new ways mathematics is being usedat all levels of marketing, anagement, research, and operationswere set out by Business Week's tephen Baker in a cover story (January 23, 2006) titled, "Why Math ill Rock Your World."
Every parent, and every aspirant to the new mid le class, should read this story.
The world is moving into a new age of numbers.
Partnerships be ween mathematicians and computer scientists are bulling into whole ew domains of business and imposing the efficiencies of math.
This has appened before.
In past decades, the marriage of higher math and com uter modeling transformed science and engineering.
Quants turned fi ance upside down a generation ago.
And data miners plucked useful uggets from vast consumer and business databases.
But just look at here the mathematicians are now.
They're helping to map out adver ising campaigns, they're changing the nature of research in newsrooms HE UNTOUCHABLES nd in biology labs, and they're enabling marketers to forge new one-onone relationships with customers.
As this occurs, more of the economy alls into the realm of numbers.
Says James R. Schatz, chief of the math matics research group at the National Security Agency: There has ever been a better time to be a mathematician .
. '
In the past decade, a izable chunk of humanity has moved its work, play, chat, and shopping nline.
We feed networks gobs of digital data that once would have lan uished on scraps of paperor vanished as forgotten conversations.
hese slices of our lives now sit in databases, many of them in the public omain.
From a business point of view, they're just begging to be ana yzed.
But even with the most powerful computers and abundant, cheap torage, companies can't sort out their swelling oceans of data, much less uild businesses on them, without enlisting skilled mathematicians and omputer scientists.
The rise of mathematics is heating up the job mar et for luminary quants, especially at the Internet powerhouses where ew math grads land with six-figure salaries and rich stock deals.
Tom eighton, an entrepreneur and applied math professor at Massachusetts nstitute of Technology, says: 'All of my students have standing offers at ahoo!
and Google.'
Top mathematicians are becoming a new global lite.
It's a force of barely 5,000, by some guesstimates, but every bit as owerful as the armies of Harvard University MBAs who shook up corner uites a generation ago .
In a world teeming with data, we ourselves ecome the math nerds' most prized specimens.
Researchers at Aetna ealth Care, Amazon.com, and many other companies are piecing to ether mathematical models of customers and employees.
Some models redict what music we'll buy, others figure out which worker is best quipped for a particular job.
For now, these models are crude, the digi al equivalent of stick figures.
But over the coming decade, each of us ill give birth to far more fleshed out simulations of ourselves.
We'll be odeled as workers, shoppers, voters, and patients."
hile society will clearly need and demand more high-end, genius athematicians who can design and execute the sorts of algorithms that rive search engines and Wall Street derivative strategies, we also need ore people trained in basic calculus, because more and more math nd quantitative skills will be needed to do more and more standard  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ew middle jobs.
I had not been in a hospital for a long time before my other fell ill in the spring of 2006.
As I sat in the hall outside her room,  was amazed at how many computers were being used by the nursing taffto track patients or administer dosages.
You did not have to be a ath genius to operate them.
But you could not be a math illiterate ei her.
Even the UPS delivery person has to be able to manage the simple ath on that handheld tracking device now and be able to load the truck n a pattern that is determined by an algorithm designed by UPS head uartersso packages are easily retrieved in order of delivery.
n an essay in Ubiquity, an IT magazine (March 21, 2006), Espen ndersen, associate professor at the Norwegian School of Management, isted all the reasons a young person should want to study math today, but ne in particular stood out to me.
"Choose math," he wrote, "because you ill meet it more and more in the future.
Math becomes more and more mportant in all areas of work and scholarship.
Future journalists and oliticians will talk less and analyze more.
Future police officers and mil tary personnel will use more and more complicated technology.
Future urses and teachers will have to relate to numbers and technology every ay.
Future car mechanics and carpenters will use chip-optimization and tress analysis as much as monkey wrenches and hammers.
There will be ore math at work, so you will need more math at school."
ortunately, people are catching on.
Thinkport.org is a Web site that rovides advice for Maryland educators and families.
In November 2006 t carried the following item: "How many times do we adults say to one nother, T m just not good at math!?
That may be true for some of us.
ut it won't be a good enough answer for our children.
In fact, you may e shocked at the central role of math in the new generation of jobs.
onsider: In 62 percent of American jobs over the next 10 years, entrylevel workers will need to be proficient in algebra, geometry, data inter retation, probability, and statistics, according to a study by the merican Diploma Project...
If you are the parent of a high schooler: ake sure your child takes and passes Algebra I, Geometry, and Algebra I.
Even if your child fulfills the math requirements by junior year, insist hat he or she take a math class, such as calculus, senior year."
HE UNTOUCHABLES HE REAT OCALIZERS hile big business is certainly important for creating middle-class obs, the fact is that small and medium-size businesses really do the ma ority of hiring and firing.
When those small and medium-size busi esses are growing and hiring people, the economy is robust, and when hey are not, it is in recession.
So, if there is to be a new middle, small nd medium-size businesses must play key roles.
What is exciting and ncouraging about the flattening of the world and innovations like he Business Web is the degree to which they give small business so uch more power and so many more cost savings to innovate and ompete globally.
Joel Cawley, the IBM strategist, calls this "localizing he global."
As he puts it: "There is going to be a huge amount of busi ess for those small and medium-size firms that learn how to take all he global capabilities that are now out there and tailor them to the eeds of a local community .
It's the localization of the global and e're just at the beginning of it.
It has enormous potential to be very ob-creating."
hose who are successful at this will understand the emerging global nfrastructure, and then adapt all the new tools it offers to local needs and emands.
This is going to create a lot of new middle jobs.
The localiza ion of the global will be the freelancer who finds a way to use a satellite ish, a DSL line, a BlackBerry, a PC, or some new software to become a ook editor or a film editor or an eBay entrepreneur from his or her bed oom.
It will be the sports bar owner who learns to use multiple satellite eeds on multiple flat-screen TVs to bring twelve NFL games at once, lus a golf tournament in Europe, a basketball game in China, and a soc er match in Australia to his bar patrons on Sunday afternoons.
It will be he coffee bar that is able to keep customers in their seats much longer by ffering free wireless connectivity.
It will be the small-time entrepreneur ho understands that he can now hire Amazon.com to provide a global ogistics infrastructure to manage his sale of customized bookplates, and ho understands he can go online and find a company in China that ill make those bookplates, and who, therefore, overnight becomes an mporter of bookplates for bookstores, all sold online.
It will be the per-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T on who opens a UPS store and becomes overnight a global supply chain anager for other small businesses.
It will be the local auto repair shop hat suddenly discovers that it can get cheaper BMW hubcaps and ercedes windshield wipers from a supplier in Romania than one in ochester.
inally, it will be people in all sorts of businesses and industries who nderstand the power of "modeling"and I am not talking about Cindy rawford.
Using computer simulation and graphics, you can now bring ll sorts of data together to create models that will show you how all kinds f complex things work togetherbefore you actually go through the xpensive process of building them.
As a realtor who learns how to odel, you can show prospective buyers the floor plan of a house or an partment and let them move the walls around wherever they like.
As an ngineer who learns how to model, you can do the same with bridges nd roads.
So those landscape architects, financial planners, home de igners, and real estate brokers who get it, who become skilled at working ith clients to build, customize, and interpret models, will also find hemselves with a pathway to the new middle.
ese are broad categories, and new ones will surely be constantiy merging.
And there are certainly no hard-and-fast boundaries be ween these different strategies, either.
Often people will mix and match hem.
So let me leave you here with one last examplemy childhood riend, Bill Greer, whom I think of now as a great adapter, localizer, and ersonalizer.
He has drawn on all three strategies to secure a place in the ew middle.
Greer isfiftyyears old and has made his living as a freelance rtist and graphic designer for twenty-eight years.
From the late 1970s ntil right around 2000, the way Bill did his job and served his clients as pretty much the same.
Clients, like The New York Times, would want a finished piece of art ork," Bill explained to me.
So if he was doing an illustration for a news aper or a magazine, or proposing a new logo for a product, he would ctually create a piece of artsketch it, color it, mount it on an illustra ion board, cover it with tissue, put it in a package that was opened with HE UNTOUCHABLES woflaps,and have it delivered by messenger or FedEx.
He called it "flap rt."
In the industry it was known as "camera-ready art," because it eeded to be shot, printed on four different layers of color film, or "sepa ations," and prepared for publication.
"It was a finished product, and it ad a certain preciousness to it," said Bill.
"It was a real piece of art, and ometimes people would hang them on their walls.
In fact, The New York imes would have shows of works that were created by illustrators for its ublications."
ut in the last few years "that started to change," Bill told me, as pub ications and ad agencies moved to digital preparation, relying on the new oftware namely, Quark, Photoshop, and Illustrator, which graphic rtists refer to as "the trinity"which made digital computer design so uch easier.
Everyone who went through art school got trained on these rograms.
Indeed, Bill explained, graphic design got so much easier that it ecame a commodity.
It got turned into vanilla ice cream.
"In terms of de ign," he said, "the technology gave everyone the same tools, so everyone ould do straight lines and everyone could do work that was halfway de ent.
You used to need an eye to see if something was in balance and had he right typeface, but all of a sudden anyone could hammer out some hing that was acceptable."
o Greer pushed himself up the knowledge ladder.
As publications emanded that all final products be presented as digital files that could e uploaded, and there was no longer any more demand for that pre ious flap art, he transformed himself into an ideas consultant.
"Idea ion" was what his clients, including McDonald's and Unilever, wanted.
e stopped using pens and ink and would just do pencil sketches, scan hem into his computer, color them by using the computer's mouse, and hen e-mail them to the client, which would have some less skilled artists inish them.
It was unconscious," said Greer.
"I had to look for work that not veryone else could do, and that young artists couldn't do with technol gy for a fraction of what I was being paid.
So I started getting offers here people would say to me, 'Can you do this and just give us the big dea?'
They would give me a concept, and they would just want sketches, deas, and not a finished piece of art.
I still use the basic skill of drawing,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ut just to convey an idea quick sketches, not finished artwork.
And for hese ideas they will still pay pretty good money.
It has actually taken me o a different level.
It is more like being a consultant rather than a JAFA Just Another Fucking Artist).
There are a lot of JAFAs out there.
So now  am an idea man, and I have played off that.
My clients just buy con epts."
The JAFAs then do the art in-house or it gets outsourced.
"They an take my raw sketches and finish them and illustrate them using com uter programs, and it is not like I would do it, but it is good enough," reer said.
ut then another thing happened.
While the evolving technology urned the lower end of Greer's business into a commodity, it opened up  whole new market at the upper end: Greer's magazine clients.
One day, ne of his regular clients approached him and asked if he could do orphs.
Morphs are cartoon strips in which one character evolves into nother.
So Martha Stewart is in the opening frame and morphs into ourtney Love by the closing frame.
Drew Barrymore morphs into Drew arey.
Mariah Carey morphs into Jim Carrey.
Cher morphs into Britney pears.
When he was first approached to do these, Greer had no idea here to begin.
So he went onto Amazon.com and located some special zed software that would empower him to create morphs, bought it, tried t out for a few days, and produced his first morph drawings.
Since then e has developed a specialty in the process, and the market for them has xpanded to include Maxim magazine, More, and Nickelodeonone a en's magazine, one a middle-aged women's magazine, and one a kids' agazine.
n other words, someone invented a whole new kind of sauce to go on he vanilla, and Greer jumped on it.
This is exactly what happens in the lobal economy as a whole.
"I was experienced enough to pick these morphs] up pretty quickly," said Greer.
"Now I do them on my Mac lap op, anywhere I am, from Santa Barbara to Minneapolis to my apartment n New York.
Sometimes clients give me a subject, and sometimes I just ome up with them.
Morphing used to be one of those really high-end hings you saw on TV, and then they came out with this consumer [soft are] program and people could do it themselves, and I shaped them so agazines could use them.
I just upload them as a series of JPEG HE UNTOUCHABLES iles .
Morphs have been a good business for different magazines.
I ven get fan mail from kids!"
reer had never done morphs until the technology evolved and cre ted a new, specialized niche, just when a changing market for his work ade him eager to learn new skills.
"I wish I could say it was all inten ional," he confessed.
"I was just available for work and just lucky they ave me a chance to do these things.
I know so many artists who got ashed out.
One guy who was an illustrator has become a package de igner, some have gotten out of the field altogether; one of the best de igners I know became a landscape architect.
She is still a designer but hanged her medium altogether.
Visual people can adapt, but I am still ervous about the future."
told Greer his story fit well into some of the terms I was using in this ook.
He began as a chocolate sauce (a classic illustrator), was turned nto a vanilla commodity (a classic illustrator in the computer age), up raded his skills to become a special chocolate sauce again (a design con ultant), then learned how to become a cherry on top (a morphs artist) by sing the new tools of the flat world to fill a new market niche.
reer contemplated my compliment for a moment and then said, And here all I was trying to do was surviveand I still am."
As he got up o leave, though, he told me that he was going out to meet a friend "to jug le together."
They have been juggling partners for years, just a little side usiness they sometimes do on a street corner or for private parties.
Greer as very good hand-eye coordination.
"But even juggling is being commoditized," he complained.
"It used to be if you could juggle five balls, ou were really special.
Now jugglingfiveballs is like just anteing up.
My artner and I used to perform together, and he was the seven-ball champ hen I met him.
Now fourteen-year-old kids can juggle seven balls, no roblem.
Now they have these books, like Juggling for Dummies, and kits hat will teach you how to juggle.
So they've just upped the standard."
EVEN he Right Stuff ubas and Test Tubes  friend once asked Isidor I. Rabi, a Nobel Prize winner in physics, how he be ame a scientist.
Rabi replied that every day after school his mother would talk o him about his school day.
She wasn't so much interested in what he had earned that day, but she always inquired, "Did you ask a good question today?"
Asking good questions," Rabi said, "made me become a scientist."
Source unknown   the past two years I have had a chance to travel around America and peak about globalization and the flat world to many different audi nces, from retirees in Palm Springs to high school principals in ethesda to parents in suburban book clubs.
What struck me most was he undertow of concern I found in the country around the issues of ducation and competition.
If I had to summarize that anxiety, I would ut it like this: Our parents were sure that they were going to live bet er than their parents and that we, their children, were going to live better han them.
We, alas, are growing quite concerned that we are not going o retire as well-off as our parents did, and our kids probably are not go ng to be as well-off as we were.
Everyone seemed to me to be looking for he magic formula that would spare their kids from a future of downward obility.
Twice I had parents ask me a question that went roughly like his: "My daughter is studying Chinese.
She's going to be okay, right?"
Well," I would answer, "not exactly."
hy not exactly?
Because there is no magic formula.
At a moment HE RIGHT STUFF ike this one, I feel it would be useful to step back, take a deep breath, and sk: If the strategies detailed in the previous chapter really are going to be he best way for individuals to obtain and retain jobs in the new middle, hen, generally speaking, what is the right kind of education to prepare ur young people for those jobs?
As Princeton economist Alan Blinder erceptively notes, "It is clear that the U.S. and other rich nations will ave to transform their educational systems so as to produce workers for he jobs that will actually exist in their societies .
Simply providing more ducation is probably a good thing on balance, especially if a more edu ated labor force is a more flexible labor force that can cope more readily ith non-routine tasks and occupational change.
But it is far from a anacea .
In the future, how we educate our children may prove to be ore important than how much we educate them."
o what is the right stuff?
I am not an educator, but I am a reporter, and n this chapter I want to share what I have learned from asking employers nd educators precisely that question.
It would be utterly presumptuous of e to suggest that I have the magic formula or the complete list.
But what ollows are five skill sets or attitudes toward learning that my own reporting uggests would be helpful in preparing young people for the new middle obs in a flat world.
e first, and most important, ability you can develop in a flat world is he ability to "learn how to learn"to constantly absorb, and teach ourself, new ways of doing old things or new ways of doing new things.
hat is an ability every worker should cultivate in an age when parts or all f many jobs are constantly going to be exposed to digitization, automa ion, and outsourcing, and where new jobs, and whole new industries, ill be churned up faster and faster.
In such a world, it is not only what ou know but how you learn that will set you apart.
Because what you now today will be out-of-date sooner than you think.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T n a talk I gave in St. Paul, Minnesota, I made this point, and during he question-and-answer period afterward a young man in the balcony aised his hand, identified himself as a ninth grader, and asked: "Mr. riedman, if it is that important to learn how to learn, how do you learn ow to learn?
What course should I take?"
rom the mouths of babes .
t's a logical question.
At the time I had not thought it through in de ail.
So I ad-libbed an answer, which I think is in the right direction: "Go round to your friends and ask them just one question: 'Who are your fa orite teachers?'
Then make a list of those teachers and go out and take heir coursesno matter what they are teaching, no matter what the sub ect."
It doesn't matter whether they are teaching Greek mythology, cal ulus, art history, or American literaturetake their courses.
Because hen I think back on my favorite teachers, I don't remember the specifics f what they taught me, but I sure remember being excited about learn ng it.
What has stayed with me are not the facts they imparted but the ex itement about learning they inspired.
To learn how to learn, you have to ove learningor you have to at least enjoy itbecause so much learning s about being motivated to teach yourself.
And while it seems that some eople are just born with that motivation, many others can develop it or ave it implanted with the right teacher (or parent).
AVIGATION  cond, we need to think more about how we teach "navigation" kills.
As the world flattens out, more and more knowledge, informa ion, news, software, commerce, and communities will reside on the orld Wide Web.
Our children will interact with each other, with the ider world, and with all that resides on that Web without many filters.
herefore, teaching them how to navigate that virtual world, and how to ift through it and separate the noise, the filth, and the lies from the facts, he wisdom, and the real sources of knowledge becomes more important han ever.
When the Web first emerged, I used to joke that if I had one HE RIGHT STUFF ervent wish it would be that every modem sold would come with a warn ng label from the surgeon general that would say: "Judgment Not ncluded."
n May 2002, I sat with twenty thoughtful young Indonesians in the arden of the Pondok Pesantren Darunnajah, one of Jakarta's finest slamic boarding schools, to ask them for their views of America.
I wanted o understand how the world's largest Muslim nation was reacting to eptember 11 and the Middle East crisis.
I could tell you in my own ords, but let me instead run the tape of my chat with the most articulate tudentan eighteen-year-old girl.
Most Muslims are afraid of America because they think America is gainst Islam," she began.
"You can see that America is backing the sraelians, and the enmity between Islam and Israel, the Jews [and] udaism, is obvious.
It is not that Americans are afraid of Muslims, but hat Muslims are afraid of Americans.
As for the [September 11] tragedy, e can't prove that Muslims did it.
Because up to now they have not ound evidence to prove that [bin Laden] is the one who did it.
Also I ead in some newspaper that the real people who did that tragedy are mericans...
I don't know [what] percent of the Congress are Jewish, but] America is backing Israel, and I think therein lies the feeling of en ity toward America."
hat do you think of President George W. Bush?
I asked her.
"At he beginning, when George Bush became president, some people thought e is only going to be like his father and he's not going to make anything ewand also people did not want Al Gore to win because he was ewish.
So people said, 'Okay, George Bush is better...' He promised a ot of really good things but [has] not realized them up to now."
he was absolutely certain Al Gore was Jewish.
here do you get your news?
I asked her.
"I get most information rom the TV, from the Internet, too .
I really like to read the [online] rabic magazines because they give a different point of view.
If I read ndonesian magazines, they don't have a lot of information about uslims and Islam."
always think of that young woman as someone who lacked, among ther things, navigation skillsthe ability to sort out truth from fiction in  H E W O R L D IS F L A T his open sewer of information, facts, insights, lies, and half-truths called he World Wide Web.
How many times have you heard someone say, "But  read it on the Internet..." as if that should settle the matter?
Because the nternet comes with a patina of technology, things that are read there, par icularly by those without navigation skills, seem more believable.
There is  great line in the Robin Williams movie Man of the Year, which is about olitics, television, and a comedianWilliamswho runs for president.
t one point, one of candidate Williams's aides remarks to him that the roblem with television is that it makes everything and everyone "seem redible"and when everyone is credible, no one is credible.
A comedian ebating an expert: both seem equal.
The same could be said of the nternet.
It makes everything seem equally credible to the uninitiated.
So BCNews.com says Al Gore is Christian on its Web site and Jihad.com ays Al Gore is Jewish on its Web site.
On a flat screen, they both seem qual.
n the Indian newspaper Daily News and Analysis (November 5, 005), Sachin Kalbag, the paper's Washington correspondent, wrote the ollowing, which caught my eye: "The Web is undeniably the ultimate torehouse of information, a sort of Encyclopaedia Britannica s Encyclo aedia Britannica.
So, you can be as sure to find the real reason for pigeons obbing their heads as you can be 100 per cent pukka about finding what olitas' actually means in the hit Eagles' song 'Hotel California.'
A whole ew generation is now waking up with the Web as its constant companion ust as the previous one went to sleep with a security blanket.
If you need tuff for your Ph.D. research, go to the Web .
If you need to plagiarize omething for your academic thesis or an office report, the Web is there for ou.
It is, as if, we are giving rise to an army of instant masterminds just like he 50-odd news channels on television have given rise to rent-a-minute ex erts on any topic.
The result is that the same generation is in danger of rowing up with 170 terabytes of knowledge and information, but not ore than a few bits of wisdom.
The challenge for the next generation of arents, educationists and thinkers will, therefore, not be the dissemination f information, but to change the way people differentiate between infor ation and wisdom.
Indeed the lines that divide the two have been lurred so much that information is often confused as wisdom."
HE RIGHT STUFF o be sure, navigation skills, judgment, and the ability to find wisdom nd knowledge in the fire hoseflowof information were always important.
ut they are more important than ever as the world flattens out and more eople are getting their information from news sites that are not edited ith the rigor of The New York Times or the BBC, as more people are asked o learn on their own in nonclassroom settings, particularly online, as more eople are generating their own contentblogs and podcastswithout onventional standards, and as more people interact with more other peo le whom they do not know and may never meet.
e cannot stick our heads in the sand on this.
Joel Cawley of IBM told e that at his daughter's high school they forbid students to cite ikipedia entries in footnotes of their papers.
Cawley rightly disagreed ith this policy.
"They meant wellthey thought they were teaching kids o be careful," said Cawley.
"But what they were actually doing is missing n opportunity to teach them how to navigate"how to go about sorting nd cross-checking facts wherever they might find them.
We can't tell our ids to ignore the resources on the Web.
But we can and must teach them etter how to navigate them.
Q   PQ  Q  third broad theme would be passion and curiosity.
It was and al ays will be a great advantage to have passion and curiosity for nything.
But again, when the world is flat, curiosity and passion for a ob, for success, for a subject area or even a hobby are so much more im ortant than they once were.
Because in the flat world you have so any more tools to take you and your curiosity so much farther and so uch deeper.
oc Searls, senior editor of the Linux Journal and one of the most re pected technology writers in America, spoke to this point in a review of he first edition of this book (April 28, 2005).
He said: "In the flat new orld, educational opportunities are limitless, even without help from chool, government, churches or business.
Much of what you need to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T now about pretty much everything is out there on the Web somewhere  specially if you're a technologist.
Yes, the Web isn't everywhere.
But it's n all the flat places, and the flatness is spreading, fast... Of course, the verage and the dumb are still plentiful, no doubt about it.
But try this oncept on for size: Most of them were made that way.
They were shaped n large measure by school systems that have had, from the dawn of the in ustrial age, a main purpose: to produce employees for boxed positions in orporate org charts that take the shape of pyramids, wide at the bottom nd narrow at the top .
There were few alternatives in the industrial ge, aside from farming and other relatively solitary occupations.
But here are plenty of alternatives now, as many as there are individuals with ccess to broadband."
or all these reasons, I have concluded that in a flat world, IQ ntelligence quotientstill matters, but CQ and PQcuriosity quotient nd passion quotientmatter even more.
I live by the equation CQ + PQ  IQ.
Give me a kid with a passion to learn and a curiosity to discover and  will take him or her over a less passionate kid with a high IQ every day of he week.
Curious, passionate kids are self-educators and self-motivators.
hey will always be able to learn how to learn, especially on the flat-world latform, where you can both download and upload.
"Work matters," said earls, "but curiosity matters more.
Nobody works harder at learning than  curious kid."
or my money, they could engrave that onto the doorway of every chool in America: Nobody works harder at learning than a curious kid.
ome kids are just born that way, but for the many who are not, the est way to make kids love learning is either to instill in them a sense of uriosity, by great teaching, or to stimulate their own innate curiosity by aking available to them all the technologies of theflat-worldplatform so hey can educate themselves in an enormously rich way.
Consider this tory from The New York Times s Education Life supplement (April 24, 005).
It was about Britney Schmidt, a student at the University of rizona, who was utterly bored with her courses, mostly because her pro essors seemed interested only in giving lectures and leaving.
I was getting A's in all my classes, but I wasn't being challenged, and  wasn't thinking about new things," she told a Times reporter.
One se- HE RIGHT STUFF ester, though, Ms. Schmidt had to take a natural-science course, and it urned out to have a great professor and teaching assistants, who stoked er curiosity and lit a fire in her.
"I was lucky," she said.
"I took a class rom somebody who really cared."
The result: A scientist was born.
Many ore science courses later, Ms. Schmidt was accepted to graduate school t UCLA in planetary physics and the University of Chicago in cosmochemistry.
ou can't light the fire of passion in someone else if it doesn't burn in ou to begin with.
Hilarie Rooney, the principal of Laytonsville Ele entary School in Maryland's Montgomery County, came up to me after  lecture one day and told me that what she looked for in hiring teachers as one simple thing: "whether they loved kids."
Because if you don't con ect with the kids, you will never be able to convey the material, she said.
f you can't feel the music, you'll never be able to play the music.
But if you love kids," she said, "and you convey that, even if you don't eally know that much about the subject you're teaching, they will be in pired by you and they will go out and learn it themselves.
I can teach any ne a strategy, but I can't teach a person to love kids.
And you can feel it n a classroom as soon as you walk in [whether that teacher loves kids].
ids at the elementary level all love their teachers, but boy, you can see he teachers who love those kids back.
They motivate those kids to keep rying to do their best for that teacher.
The [kids] are really doing it for hemselves, but if they see that teacher really cares, is invested in their earning, that child will never be turned off.
That is what real learning is."
s it possible to generate your own high PQa high passion quotient or a subjectwithout a teacher or parent stimulating you?
Of course.
ust think back to when you were a kid and you got your first fire truck or oll or doctor's kit or astronaut's helmet, and you told everyone you anted to be a fireman or a fashion model or a doctor or an astronaut hen you grew up.
That innocent passion for a certain job, without know ng the salary or the working hours or the preparation required, is what ou need to get back in touch with.
It's that childlike feeling of "I want to o that because I want to do thatand I don't have to explain why" that e all need to rediscover.
To put it simply: You need to rediscover your in er fire truck.
We all have one, and when you find it, you'll know it.
HE  O R L D IS F L A T TRESSING L I B E R A L ARTS  urth, since one of the new middle jobs is great synthesizers, encour ging young people early to think horizontally and to connect dis arate dots has to be a priority.
Because this is where and how so much nnovation happens.
But first you need dots to connect.
And to me that eans a liberal arts education.
Liberal arts is a very horizontal form of ed cation (which is to say, a flat form of education).
It is all about making onnections among history, art, politics, and science.
Yes, we need to be ore rigorous in training our young people in math and science, which re the building blocks of so much knowledge.
But we also need to be vig lant in upholding the teaching of art and music and literature, because hey too are essential for innovation.
I like how Marc Tucker, who heads he National Center on Education and the Economy, puts it: "One thing e know about creativity is that it typically occurs when people who have astered two or more quite different fields use the framework in one to hink afresh about the other.
Intuitively, you know this is true.
Leonardo a Vinci was a great artist, scientist, and inventor, and each specialty nour shed the other.
He was a great lateral thinker.
But if you spend your hole life in one silo, you will never have either the knowledge or mental gility to do the synthesis, connect the dots, which is usually where the ext great breakthrough is found."
ne of the best examples of that I can think of is the story that Steve obs, the cofounder of Apple Computer, told about himself in a com encement speech at Stanford University (June 12, 2005):  am honored to be with you today at your commencement from ne of the finest universities in the world.
I never graduated from ollege.
Truth be told, this is the closest I've ever gotten to a college raduation.
Today I want to tell you three stories from my life .
he first story is about connecting the dots.
dropped out of Reed College after the first 6 months, but hen stayed around as a drop-in for another 18 months or so be ore I really quit.
So why did I drop out?
HE RIGHT STUFF t started before I was born.
My biological mother was a young, nwed college graduate student, and she decided to put me up for doption.
She felt very strongly that I should be adopted by college raduates, so everything was all set for me to be adopted at birth by  lawyer and his wife.
Except that when I popped out they decided t the last minute that they really wanted a girl.
So my parents, who ere on a waiting list, got a call in the middle of the night asking: We have an unexpected baby boy; do you want him?"
They said: Of course."
My biological mother later found out that my mother ad never graduated from college and that my father had never raduated from high school.
She refused to sign the final adoption apers.
She only relented a few months later when my parents romised that I would someday go to college.
nd 17 years later I did go to college.
But I naively chose a ollege that was almost as expensive as Stanford, and all of my orking-class parents' savings were being spent on my college tu tion.
After six months, I couldn't see the value in it.
I had no idea hat I wanted to do with my life and no idea how college was go ng to help me figure it out.
And here I was spending all of the oney my parents had saved their entire life.
So I decided to drop ut and trust that it would all work out OK.
It was pretty scary at he time, but looking back it was one of the best decisions I ever ade.
The minute I dropped out I could stop taking the required lasses that didn't interest me, and begin dropping in on the ones hat looked interesting.
t wasn't all romantic.
I didn't have a dorm room, so I slept on he floor in friends' rooms, I returned coke bottles for the 50 de osits to buy food with, and I would walk the 7 miles across town very Sunday night to get one good meal a week at the Hare rishna temple.
I loved it.
And much of what I stumbled into by ollowing my curiosity and intuition turned out to be priceless ater on.
Let me give you one example: eed College at that time offered perhaps the best calligraphy nstruction in the country.
Throughout the campus every poster,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T very label on every drawer, was beautifully hand calligraphed.
ecause I had dropped out and didn't have to take the normal lasses, I decided to take a calligraphy class to learn how to do this.
learned about serif and sans serif typefaces, about varying the mount of space between different letter combinations, about hat makes great typography great.
It was beautiful, historical, ar istically subtle in a way that science can't capture, and I found it ascinating.
one of this had even a hope of any practical application in y life.
But ten years later, when we were designing the first acintosh computer, it all came back to me.
And we designed it ll into the Mac.
It was the first computer with beautiful typogra hy.
If I had never dropped in on that single course in college, the ac would have never had multiple typefaces or proportionally paced fonts.
And since Windows just copied the Mac, it's likely hat no personal computer would have them .
Of course it was mpossible to connect the dots looking forward when I was in col ege.
But it was very, very clear looking backwards ten years later.
gain, you can't connect the dots looking forward; you can nly connect them looking backwards.
So you have to trust that he dots will somehow connect in your future.
You have to trust n somethingyour gut, destiny, life, karma, whatever.
This ap roach has never let me down, and it has made all the difference n my life.
teve Jobs's story underscores that the inspiration for technological reakthroughs is not always rooted in technological knowledge alone.
ath and science are necessarycritically necessarybut they are not ufficient.
I think one reason America has always been a leader in inno ation of new products and servicesfrom IBMs to iPodsis that our so iety has always valued both technology and liberal arts.
In our justifiable esire to leave no child behind, we need to make sure that we don't leave rt and music and theater and literature classes behind as well.
It would ndermine a critical source of our economic strength and our ability to enerate good new middle jobs and the workers to fill them.
HE RIGHT STUFF s Marc Tucker notes: hose countries that produce the most important new products nd services can capture a premium in world markets that will en ble them to pay high wages to their citizens .
But that kind of eadership does not depend on technology alone.
It depends on a eep vein of creativity that is constantly renewing itself, and on a yriad of people who can imagine how people can use things hat have never been available before, create ingenious marketing nd sales campaigns, write books, build furniture, make movies, magine new kinds of software that will capture people's imagina ion and become indispensable to millions.
his is a world in which a very high level of preparation in eading, writing, speaking, mathematics, science, literature, his ory and the arts will be an indispensable foundation for every hing that comes after for most members of the workforce.
It is a orld in which comfort with ideas and abstractions is the passport o a good job, in which creativity and innovation are the key to a ood life, in which high levels of educationa very different kind f education than most of us have had are going to be the only ecurity there is.
world in which routine work is largely done by machines is a orld in which mathematical reasoning will be no less important han math facts, in which line workers who cannot contribute to he design of the products they are fabricating may be as obsolete s the last model of that product,... in which software engineers ho are also musicians and artists will have an edge over those who re not, as the entertainment industry evolves, [a world] in which t will pay architects to know something about nano-technology nd small businessmen who build custom yachts and fishing boats ill be able to survive only if they quickly learn a lot about the sci ntific foundations of carbon fiber composites.
s I have said, India and China have provided large numbers of their oung people with solid foundations in math and science, and it has been HE  O R L D IS F L A T xtremely important in their rise out of poverty.
But it is no accident that hen you talk to Indian and Chinese businesspeople and even educators, ome now openly express their concerns that if math and science are not eavened by art, literature, music, and the humanities, their countries will e at a competitive disadvantage as they try to get to the next level of lobal competition.
erry Rao, the cofounder of MphasiS, the big Indian outsourcing firm, ut it to me this way: "We have no one going into the liberal arts and veryone going into engineering and MBAs.
We're becoming a nation of spiring programmers and salespeople."
ifty years ago, the Sanskrit scholar was respected in India, Mr. Rao oted, but today it is all about becoming an engineer, a programmer, an BA, or a doctor.
"More people will get Ph.D.'s [in the study of] Sanskrit n America this year than in India," Mr. Rao asserted, "and Sanskrit is the oot of our culture!
If we don't have enough people with the humanities, we will lose the next generation of] V. S. Naipauls and Amartya Sens," he added, refer ing to the Indian-Trinidadian author and the Indian economist, both obel laureates.
"That is sad and dangerous."
IGHT RAIN  nally, if creativity depends on connecting disparate dots, then we need o be educating our young people not only in more dots,  la the liberal rts, but also in the ability to think horizontallyto mesh together different erspectives and disciplines to produce a third thing.
That skill is something hat happens on the right side of our brainsand educators need to think bout how we nurture that.
Daniel Pink, author of A Whole New Mind: oving from the Information Age to the Conceptual Age, explains: cientists have long known that a neurological Mason-Dixon line leaves our brains into two regionsthe left and right hemi- HE RIGHT S T U F F pheres.
But in the last 10 years, thanks in part to advances in func ional magnetic resonance imaging, researchers have begun to dentify more precisely how the two sides divide responsibilities.
he left hemisphere handles sequence, literalness, and analysis.
he right hemisphere, meanwhile, takes care of context, emo ional expression, and synthesis.
Of course, the human brain, with ts 100 billion cells forging 1 quadrillion connections, is breathtakingly complex.
The two hemispheres work in concert, and we en ist both sides for nearly everything we do.
But the structure of our rains can help explain the contours of our times.
ntil recently, the abilities that led to success in school, work, nd business were characteristic of the left hemisphere.
They were he sorts of linear, logical, analytical talents measured by SATs and eployed by CPAs.
Today, those capabilities are still necessary.
But hey're no longer sufficient.
In a world upended by outsourcing, eluged with data, and choked with choices, the abilities that atter most are now closer in spirit to the specialties of the right emisphereartistry, empathy, seeing the big picture, and pursu ng the transcendent.
f we want more of our young people to be untouchablesthat is, eople with jobs that "a computer or robot cannot do faster or some tal nted foreigner cannot do cheaper and just as well," we need to focus ed cation on constantly developing our students' right-brain skills"such s forging relationships rather than executing transactions, tackling novel hallenges instead of solving routine problems, and synthesizing the big icture rather than analyzing a single component," argues Pink.
e're not all going to lose our jobs tomorrow .
But as the cost of ommunicating with the other side of the globe falls essentially to ero, as India becomes (by 2010) the country with the most nglish speakers in the world, and as developing nations continue o mint millions of extremely capable knowledge workers, the pro essional lives of people in the West will change dramatically.
If  H E W O R L D IS F L A T umber crunching, chart reading, and code writing can be done or a lot less overseas and delivered to clients instantly via fiber ptic cable, that's where the work will go.
ut these gusts of comparative advantage are blowing away nly certain kinds of white-collar jobsthose that can be reduced o a set of rules, routines, and instructions.
That's why narrow leftbrain work such as basic computer coding, accounting, legal re earch, and financial analysis is migrating across the oceans.
But hat's also why plenty of opportunities remain for people and com anies doing less routine workprogrammers who can design en ire systems, accountants who serve as life planners, and bankers xpert less in the intricacies of Excel than in the art of the deal.
Now that foreigners can do left-brain work cheaper," Pink argues, we in the U.S. must do right-brain work better."
You cannot stress that nough: Now that foreigners can do left-brain work cheaper, we in the U.S. ust do right-brain work better.
e elaborates: ast century, machines proved they could replace human muscle.
his century, technologies are proving they can outperform hu an left brainsthey can execute sequential, reductive, compu ational work better, faster, and more accurately than even those ith the highest IQs.
(Just ask chess grandmaster Garry Kasparov who lost a match to a chess-playing computer].)...
o flourish in this age, we'll need to supplement our welldeveloped high-tech abilities with aptitudes that are "high con ept" and "high touch."
High concept involves the ability to create rtistic and emotional beauty, to detect patterns and opportunities, o craft a satisfying narrative, and to come up with inventions the orld didn't know it was missing.
High touch involves the capacity o empathize, to understand the subtleties of human interaction, o find joy in one's self and to elicit it in others, and to stretch be ond the quotidian in pursuit of purpose and meaning.
HE RIGHT STUFF eveloping these high concept, high touch abilities won't e easy for everyone.
For some, the prospect seems unattainable.
ear not (or at least fear less).
The sorts of abilities that now matter ost are fundamentally human attributes.
After all, back on the sa annah, our caveperson ancestors weren't plugging numbers into preadsheets or debugging code.
But they were telling stories, emonstrating empathy, and designing innovations.
These abili ies have always been part of what it means to be human.
It's just hat after a few generations in the Information Age, many of our igh concept, high touch muscles have atrophied.
The challenge s to work them back into shape.
ut how exactly do you go about nurturing your right-brain skills?
I ave to leave the details to education experts.
But I would guess that one ay you nurture your right brain is by doing something you love to d o  r at least like to dobecause you will bring something intangible to it, omething out of your right brain, which cannot be easily repeated, auto ated, or outsourced.
As Pink put it: "The sorts of abilities that matter most ow it turns out are also the sorts of things that people do out of intrinsic otivation.
Relatively few people become accountants out of a sense of in rinsic motivation.
But intrinsic motivation is what propels people to be ome creators and empathizers, to become designers and storytellers and ounselors and consultants.
This weekend there will be accountants paint ng watercolors in their garages.
There will be lawyers writing screenplays.
ut I guarantee you that you won't find any sculptors who on weekends ill be doing other people's taxes for fun.
In other words, there is a grow ng congruence between the sorts of things that people do because they ove doing them and the sorts of things that confer economic advantage."
nd so, concludes Pink, when you hear your parents or your college raduation speaker telling you to "do what you love," they are not giving ou some syrupy pabulum.
They are giving you a survival strategy.
HE UBAS AND TEST   O R L D IS F L A T UBES  let's work backward now just one more step.
If the jobs of the newmiddle require you to be a good collaborator, leverager, adapter, ex lainer, synthesizer, model builder, localizer, or personalizer, and these pproaches require you, among other things, to be able to learn how to earn, to bring curiosity and passion to your work, to play well with others, nd to nurture your right-brain skills, what does that mean specifically for ducation?
gain, I am not an educator, so I come to this question with great hu ility.
I am a reporter, though, and I can report that there are some real ducators out there who have tried to address this question head-on.
I am mpressed by the amount of experimentation I have seen on college cam uses as they try to design the "right education" for the new middle.
I am oing to focus on one schoolGeorgia Institute of Technology, based in tlantato illustrate one thoughtful approach.
Wayne Clough, Georgia Tech's president, had to rethink educa ion in a flattening world out of sheer necessity.
Clough took over as pres dent in 1994.
"When I came to Tech as an awestruck freshman back in he sixties," Clough told me, "they had this drill for the incoming stu ents.
They would tell us: 'Look to your left.
Look to your right.
Only one f you will graduate.'
" eorgia Tech was not as selective in admissions back then as it is today, nd it relied instead on a sort of Darwinian weeding-out process, focused ntirely on grades.
As Clough tells it, it was a very cold social and academic nvironmentnot a lot of fun.
Even by the early 1990s, Georgia Tech was raduating only 65 percent of its incoming students.
Students were not fin shing because they found both the curriculum and the atmosphere rather rayand the school a place that did not celebrate student success.
lough's view as he assumed the presidency was that our country des erately needed more good scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs, so is school couldn't afford to be losing one-third of its prospective grads by raduation day.
Clough realized that only by offering the right education, ot just more education, "would we get more students applying and more tudents graduating."
HE RIGHT STUFF lough began rethinking Georgia Tech's approach by reflecting on is own experiences as a working engineer.
Some of the best engineers he ad collaborated with over the years had not been the best engineering tudents.
"They knew how to think creatively," he said.
"They might not e the ones who could solve the calculus equation better than anyone lse, but they were the ones who could define the problem that the cal ulus had to solve better than anyone else .
They were often people ith character and that something intangible."
he more time he spent on campus, the more Clough also noticed that n "awful lot of the talented students were interested in creative oudets ther than what they were experiencing in the classroom"filmmaking, or usic making, or some other offbeat hobby.
"These students were inter sting people when you talked to them.
I began to think, 'Boy, wouldn't it e nice to have more of these sorts of interesting people around campus.
t makes the place more enjoyable and it helps make the student who is ore one-dimensional more multidimensional [by having him or her] ump shoulders with these other kinds of kids."
o beginning in the late 1990s, Clough gradually altered the admis ions policies at Georgia Tech, having his admissions office focus specifi ally on recruiting and admitting good engineering students who also layed musical instruments, sang in a chorus, or played on a team.
The idea was that people who have other interests tend to be able to ommunicate, tend to be more social, tend to ask for help more readily hen they need help, tend to help others more who need help, tend to hink horizontally,... tend to be able to tie things together from different isciplines and fields."
he result, said Clough: Today more than 50 percent of Georgia ech's entering freshmen have played musical instruments or partici ated in some kind of musical groupso many that Clough's biggest hallenge now is building more recital rooms and concert areas on cam us.
"I created a monster," he joked.
He also created more graduates.
raduation rates rose from 65 percent when he arrived to 76 percent by 005.
And they are different kinds of graduates.
The student response has been great," said Clough.
"We have seen a arge increase in students taking music courses.
We had little in the way  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f chamber ensembles, and now [we have] over a dozen.
We never had a hamber orchestra group on this campus.
Now we have five.
We have omputer music synthesizing groups, jazz groups, and virtual and robotic rummers all over the place."
Virtual and robotic drummersonly at ech school!
t the same time, Clough told me, Georgia Tech's large music en embles, like the marching band and the symphony orchestra, have in reased significantly in numbers of participants and sophistication, and maller groups like its glee clubs and a capella groups also have grown ramatically.
We're talking Georgia Tech, folks, not juilliard.
"So many tudents are seeking these kinds of opportunities," Clough added, that we had an old high school on campus that we renovated into our music uilding and an old church with a big main hall that worked for some of ur singing groups.
We also created more casual places for students to ex rcise their talents, like a stage in the new student center."
lough's effort to make Georgia Tech sing was helped in 1996, when he school served as the Olympic village, housing athletes for the Atlanta lympics.
Georgia Tech's band director was selected as director of the tlanta Olympics Band.
When the Games were over, Georgia Tech was ffered the chance to buy many of the instruments the musicians had sed for half price.
"So we doubled the size of our band overnight," said lough.
"That was one of the triggers that got us started.
It was great stuff.
ecause of that we have twenty-four tubas in our marching band.
Very ew schools have twenty-four tubas.
You check it out next time you watch  bowl game."
nd very few presidents of premier technology universities boast about heir tubas as much as their test tubes.
But Clough has reason to boast, be ause my guess is that by making Georgia Tech singand by making other ser-friendly additions to the undergraduate teaching system, and by mak ng education overseas easily available for Georgia Tech studentshe is roducing not just more engineers but more of the right kind of engineers.
People who play instruments or are part of a band have more social killsthey are not just burrowed down in their work," said Clough.
And hat kind of person, he added, has a better chance of synthesizing and or hestrating insights from many different fields.
For instance, said Clough, HE RIGHT STUFF here is going to be a big demand for engineering around photonics  urning sunlight into electricity.
That requires students who are trained in asic engineering, chemical engineering, and electrical engineering.
lough quoted the head of a big engineering firm, who told him recently, Don't send me engineers who can be duplicated by a computer.
I am ending that work to India.
Send me engineers who are adaptablewho an think across disciplines."
s above, so below.
Georgia Tech's College of Computing has picked p on these broad themes and has translated them into specific courses.
fter the dot-com bubble burst, computer science enrollment at Georgia ech started to drop precipitously.
"Everyone was reading the articles bout all the jobs going to India and China," said Rich DeMillo, the for er HP chief technology officer, who is now dean of the College of omputing.
"The number one question from parents was, 'What will my id do if all the programming jobs go offshore?'"
So DeMillo and Merrick urst, the associate dean, who was brought in from the International omputer Science Institute at Berkeley, went out into the business world nd asked employers two simple questions: Who were they looking to hire nd how were computer geeks being used to add value at their compa ies?
They visited CNN's headquarters in Atlanta, for instance, and were xposed to the massive amounts of digital and analog content the network ad piled up.
It became obvious that managing all of this content via omputing, and finding ways to deploy it, from televisions to cell phones o video iPods to Web sites, was going to be a huge growth industry for the ight computer science gradsones who could help tell stories with tech ology.
fter thinking all this through, in 2004 DeMillo and Furst redesigned he computer science major at Georgia Tech around nine "threads," as hey refer to them.
Each thread is a combination of computing with an ther field, producing a synthesis of knowledgewhere the real value is oing to be created.
Threads represent a departure from a vertically oriented curriculum hose goal is the creation of students with a fixed set of skills and knowl dge," explained Furst in his course description.
"A thread is a fundamen ally horizontal idea whose goal is to give students the broad collection of  H E W O R L D IS F L A T kills and learning experiences they need to thrive in the globally com etitive Conceptual Age.
A thread provides an intuitive, flexible and mu ually strengthening set of courses that allows a student to craft his or her wn distinctive future."
he nine threads are Computing and Intelligence, Computing and mbodiment, Computing and Internetworking, Computing and Plat orms, Computing and Information, Computing and People, Computing nd Media, Computing and Modeling, and Computing Foundations.
ou need to take two threads to get a degree in computer science today rom Georgia Tech.
he Computing and Media thread, for instance, requires students to ake courses in computer science, communications, writing, and liberal rts.
The idea behind this thread, said Furst, is to teach students "what hey need to know to tell stories and create experiences for humans hrough technology."
Here you'll see courses on topics ranging from com utational graphics to Hamlet, from human perception to interactive fic ion engines, Furst added.
So, for instance, if you want to be a top-notch ame designer, this is where to start.
he Computing and People thread prepares students by helping hem to understand the theoretical and computational foundations for esigning, building, and evaluating systems that treat the human being as  central component.
The student who pursues Computing and People ight want to combine it with Computing and Embodiment to study uman-robot interaction.
There are almost as many mix-and-match per utations with these threads as there are coffee options at Starbucks.
Imagine," wrote DeMillo in an essay describing his program, "a eorgia Tech undergraduate computer-science student in her sopho ore year interested in computer security.
She might combine the omputing and Information threadto learn how data is stored, re rieved, encoded, and transmittedwith the Computing and People hreadto learn how people use technology and how to run experiments ith human subjects .
She will craft a valuable computing identity and ecome someone able to design, invent, and build secure computing sys ems enabling people to securely manage their information."
The point bout each of these threads, individually and in combination, said HE IGHT STUFF eMillo, is that they provide a skill set and credential basis that allows raduates to create value in ways beyond what would be possible with nly a narrowly focused tool setand that skill set is certain to have value n the emerging flat-world marketplace.
wenty-five years ago, computer science was easy, added DeMillo.
There was a clear stackhardware, software, and algorithmsand if ou could fit in anywhere in that stack, you had a job.
You just picked one f those sweet spots to specialize in and you were off and running.
You ould work on hardware, you could program system software, or you ould work on application algorithms.
Now fast-forward twenty-five years.
here is no clear-cut hardware, software, algorithm stack.
Instead there is usiness process, change management, and ERR Now it is all horizontal nd in constant motion.
So if you are an educator, what do you do?
What emains unchanged is the need to be able to tell stories, to be able to build hings that have intelligence in them, and to be able to create networks.
ll that remains constant.
But now the way you do that is by aggregating ieces horizontally.
The threads are aimed at putting things together that ake sense.
That is why you need to run a whole university this way.
The hole notion of separate departments is crazy.
You really need to change he whole approach.
This is not about small tinkering."
hat the Georgia Tech model recognizes is that the world is increas ngly going to be operating off the flat-world platform, with its tools for all inds of horizontal collaboration.
So schools had better make sure they re embedding these tools and concepts of collaboration into the educa ion process.
"It has to run through the whole curriculum," said Furst.
"It an't just be a single course; otherwise we will never nurture a high nough percentage of the population to be competitive."
HE RIGHT  OUNTRY  if these are the jobs and the pathways to the new middle, how well uited is America generally, in this flattening world, to creating these obs and paving these pathways?
The short answer is that we havein  H E W O R L D IS F L A T heoryall it takes to produce the jobs and educate the sorts of people ho will thrive in a flat world.
Yes, we really do.
et's go down the list.
To begin with, we have a relatively flexible, eregulated free-market economy, with lots of experimentation and com etition between states and universitieslike Georgia Tech.
The general lexibility of the American economy is a huge asset, at a time when con tant change is required to stay competitive.
So far America has not suc umbed either to economic protectionists, who want to put up walls to eep jobs in, or national security protectionists, who want to keep workers ut.
As Senator Jim DeMint of South Carolina once remarked to me, the ne thing we can't do is try to "protect our way to prosperity."
t is essential that we stay as open and flexible as possible.
America's ultural willingness to tear things down and rebuild them anew gives us n enormous advantage in the age of flatness, when you are required to ear down and build up more often to achieve innovation and growth.
We ade the transition from agriculture to industry, and then from industry o services.
Now we need to go to the next phase, which is services deliv red globally.
Each of these transitions was wrenching in its own way, but e were able to accomplish each faster and more efficiently than any ther major economy because we were open and flexible and let the mar et do its workwhich it did, though not without pain for plenty of peo le.
The transition to the flat world will be particularly wrenching ecause it is likely to touch many more white-collar workers.
Never heless, this is no time to freeze up.
You [Americans] have all the things you need to get your people from he old middle to the new middle," said Nandan Nilekani of Infosys.
"If ou get through this transition first, you will be kings of the hill.. .
[But] f people lose their nerve and protectionists come along and start building alls, you will [fail].
It is an act of faithyou have to believe that it will appen."
nderneath this umbrella offlexibility,America has a myriad of insti utional strengths.
It starts with a network of research universities, which pin off a steady stream of competitive experiments, innovations, and sci ntific breakthroughsfrom mathematics to biology to physics to chem stry.
"Our university system is the best," said Bill Gates.
"We fund our HE RIGHT S T U F F niversities to do a lot of research and that is an amazing thing.
High-IQ eople come here, and we allow them to innovate and turn [their inno ations] into products.
We reward risk taking.
Our university system is ompetitive and experimental.
They can try out different approaches.
here are one hundred universities making contributions to robotics.
nd each one is saying that the other is doing it all wrong, or my piece ac ually fits together with theirs.
It is a chaotic system, but it is a great engine f innovation in the world, and with federal tax money, with some phil nthropy on top of that, [it will continue to flourish] .
We will really ave to screw things up for our absolute wealth not to increase.
If we are mart, we can increase it faster by embracing this stuff."
he Web browser, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), superfast omputers, global position technology, space exploration devices, and iber optics are just a few of the many inventions that got started through asic university research projects.
The BankBoston Economics Depart ent did a study tided "MIT: The Impact of Innovation."
Among its con lusions was that MIT graduates have founded 4,000 companies, creating t least 1.1 million jobs worldwide and generating sales of $232 billion.
hat makes America unique is not that it built MIT, or that its grads re generating economic growth and innovation, but that every state in he country has universities trying to do the same.
"America has 4,000 col eges and universities," said Allan E. Goodman, president of the Institute f International Education.
"The rest of the world combined has 7,768 nstitutions of higher education.
In the state of California alone, there are bout 130 colleges and universities.
There are only 14 countries in the orld that have more than that number."
ake a state you normally wouldn't think of in this regard: Oklahoma.
t has its own Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science and echnology (OCAST), which, on its Web site, describes its mission as fol ows: "In order to compete effectively in the new economy, Oklahoma ust continue to develop a well-educated population; a collaborative, fo used university research and technology base; and a nurturing environ ent for cutting-edge businesses, from the smallest start-up to the largest nternational headquarters... [OCAST promotes] University-Business echnology centers, which may span several schools and businesses,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T esulting in new businesses being spawned, new products being manu actured, and new manufacturing technologies employed."
No wonder hat in 2003, American universities reaped $1.3 billion from patents, ac ording to the Association of University Technology Managers.
oupled with America's unique innovation-generating machines niversities, public and private research labs, and retailerswe have the est-regulated and most efficient capital markets in the world for taking ew ideas and turning them into products and services.
Dick Foster, di ector of McKinsey & Co. and the author of two books on innovation, re arked to me, "We have an 'industrial policy' in the U.S.it is called the tock exchange, whether it is the NYSE or the Nasdaq."
That is where risk apital is collected and assigned to emerging ideas or growing companies, oster said, and no capital market in the world does that better and more fficiently than the American one.
The easy availability of venture capital o fund new products and innovations is a hugely important factor in en bling America to get the most of the flat-world platform.
Why?
Because ld traditional companies are rarely early adopters or innovators of the ext great breakthrough technology.
The people who invented radio didn't nvent television.
CBS didn't invent CNN.
Lexis/Nexis didn't invent oogle.
Having lots of venture capital and capitalists around, though, to ake a risk and underwrite the next Google, CNN, or other untested inno ation means that those individuals who want to get the most out of the flatworld platform, who really understand its power to create new products, orms of entertainment, and communities, can do so.
hat makes capital provision work so well in America is the security nd regulation of our capital markets, where minority shareholders are rotected.
Lord knows, there are scams, excesses, and corruption in our apital markets.
That always happens when a lot of money is at stake.
hat distinguishes our capital markets is not that Enrons don't happen in mericathey sure do.
It is that when they happen, they usually get ex osed, either by the Securities and Exchange Commission or by the busi ess press, and get corrected.
What makes America unique is not Enron ut Eliot Spitzer, the attorney general of New York State, who has dog edly sought to clean up the securities industry and corporate board ooms.
This sort of capital market has proved very, very difficult to HE RIGHT S T U F F uplicate outside of New York, London, Frankfurt, and Tokyo.
Said oster, "China and India and other Asian countries will not be successful t innovation until they have successful capital markets, and they will not ave successful capital markets until they have rule of law which protects inority interests under conditions of risk... We in the U.S. are the ucky beneficiaries of centuries of economic experimentation, and we are he experiment that has worked."
hile these are the core secrets of America's sauce, there are others hat need to be preserved and nurtured.
Sometimes you have to talk to utsiders to appreciate them, such as Indian-born Vivek Paul of Wipro.
I would add three to your list," he said to me.
"One is the sheer open ess of American society."
We Americans often forget what an incredibly pen, say-anything-do-anything-start-anything-go-bankrupt-and-startanything-again society the United States is.
There is no other place like it n the world, and our openness is a huge asset and attraction to foreigners, any of whom come from countries where the sky is not the limit.
nother, said Paul, is the "quality of American intellectual property rotection," which further enhances and encourages people to come up ith new ideas.
In a flat world, there is a great incentive to develop a new roduct or process, because it can achieve global scale in a flash.
But if you re the person who comes up with that new idea, you want your intellec ual property protected.
"No country respects and protects intellectual roperty better than America," said Paul, and as a result, a lot of innovators ant to come here to work and lodge their intellectual property.
he United States also has among the most flexible labor laws in the orld.
The easier it is to fire someone in a dying industry, the easier it is o hire someone in a rising industry that no one knew would exist five ears earlier.
This is a great asset, especially when you compare the situa ion in the United States to inflexible, rigidly regulated labor markets like ermany's, full of government restrictions on hiring and firing.
Flexibility o quickly deploy labor and capital where the greatest opportunity exists, nd the ability to quickly redeploy it if the earlier deployment is no longer rofitable, is essential in a flattening world.
till another secret to America's sauce is the fact that it has the world's argest domestic consumer market, with the most first adopters, which  H E W O R L D IS F L A T eans that if you are introducing a new product, technology, or service, ou have to have a presence in America.
All this means a steady flow of obs for Americans.
here is also the little-discussed American attribute of political stabil ty.
Yes, China has had a good run for the past twenty-five years, and it may ake the transition from communism to a more pluralistic system with ut the wheels coming off.
But it may not.
Who would want all his or her ggs in that basket?
f you wanted to summarize the net effect of all these institutions, cul ural norms, business practices, and legal systems, it can be reduced to one ord: trust.
They create and inspire a high level of trustand a high level f trust is the most important feature any open society can possess.
Trust, in any ways, is the product of all the ingredients in America's secret sauce.
We are a high-trust country, because we agree that we are going to be overned by a set of values and principles reflected in our institutions and awswhich are higher and more enduring than any individual," said ov Seidman, the founder of LRN, the company that provides ethics and overnance advice for global corporations, which I will discuss in detail in hapter 11.
Together, these norms and institutions create predictability nd confidence and that creates trusta trust that my innovations will be rotected, a trust in my currency, and a trust in my justice system.
And all f that, argued Seidman, propels innovation.
hy?
Because in a high-trust society, such as America, people know hat ground they are standing on all the time and can count on a certain ramework of rules and principles to govern their personal and business ives.
"If you jump off sand and another person jumps off a hard floor," sked Seidman, "who jumps higher?
The person who jumps off a hard loor, of course.
Well, trust is that hard floor.
It is what gives you the pre ictability that allows you to take a big leap .
Without trust there is no isk-taking and without risk-taking there is no innovation .
If you want to et more people to take the necessary risk to innovate, just put more trust n the room."
No low-trust society will ever produce sustained innovation.
n a flat world, where value is increasingly created, and complex prob ems increasingly solved, by whom you connect with horizontally, having  high-trust society is even more of an advantage.
HE RIGHT S T U F F Having an abundance of trust is essential in a world of collaboration," dded Seidman, "because the more people trust each other, or their lead rs, the more likely they are going to work well together."
ndeed, the United States has become one of the great meeting points n the world, a place where lots of different people bond, learn to trust one nother, and build myriad horizontal friendships and alliances.
An In ian student who is educated at the University of Oklahoma and then ets his first job with a software firm in Oklahoma City forges bonds of rust and understanding that are really important for future collaboration, ven if he winds up returning to India.
Nothing illustrates this point bet er than Yale University's outsourcing of research to China.
Yale president ichard C. Levin explained to me that Yale has two big research opera ions running in China today, one at Peking University in Beijing and the ther at Fudan University in Shanghai.
"Most of these institutional col aborations arise not from top-down directives of university administrators, ut rather from long-standing personal relationships among scholars and cientists," said Levin.
ow did the Yale-Fudan collaboration arise?
To begin with, said evin, Yale professor Tian Xu, its director, had a deep affiliation with both nstitutions.
He did his undergraduate work at Fudan and received his h.D.
from Yale.
"Five of Professor Xu's collaborators, who are now pro essors at Fudan, were also trained at Yale," explained Levin.
One was rofessor Xu's friend when both were Yale graduate students; another was  visiting scholar in the laboratory of a Yale colleague; one was an ex hange student who came to Yale from Fudan and returned to earn his h.D.
in China; and the other two were postdoctoral fellows in Professor u's Yale lab.
A similar story underlies the formation of the Peking-Yale oint Center for Plant Molecular Genetics and Agrobiotechnology.
rofessor Xu is a leading expert on genetics and has won grants from he National Institutes of Health and the Howard Hughes Foundation to tudy the connection between genetics and cancer and certain neurode enerative diseases.
This kind of research requires the study of large num ers of genetic mutations in lab animals.
"When you want to test many enes and trace for a given gene that may be responsible for certain dis ases, you need to run a lot of tests.
Having a bigger staff is a huge advan-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T age," explained Levin.
So what Yale did was essentially outsource the lab ork to Fudan by creating the Fudan-Yale Biomedical Research Center.
ach university pays for its own staff and research, so no money changes ands, but the Chinese side does the basic technical work using large umbers of technicians and lab animals, which cost so much less in hina, and Yale does the high-end analysis of the data.
The Fudan staff, tudents, and technicians get great exposure to high-end research, and ale gets a large-scale testing facility that would have been prohibitively xpensive if Yale had tried to duplicate it in New Haven.
A support lab in merica for a project like this one might have 30 technicians, but the one n Fudan has 150.
The gains are very much two-way," said Levin.
"Our investigators get ubstantially enhanced productivity, and the Chinese get their graduate tudents trained, and their young faculty become collaborators with our rofessors, who are the leaders in their fields.
It builds human capital for hina and innovation for Yale."
Graduate students from both universities o back and forth, forging relationships that will no doubt produce more ollaborations in the future.
At the same time, he added, a lot of legal reparation went into this collaboration to make sure that Yale would be ble to harvest the intellectual property that is created.
There is one world of science out there," said Levin, "and this kind of nternational division of labor makes a lot of sense."
Yale, he said, also in isted that the working conditions at the Chinese labs be world-class, and, s a result, it has also helped to lift the quality of the Chinese facilities.
The living conditions of the lab animals are right up to U.S. standards," emarked Levin.
"These are not mouse sweatshops."
ut all the above together and you have America s secret saucea mix f institutions, laws, and cultural norms that produce a level of trust, inno ation, and collaboration that has enabled us to constantly renew our econ my and raise our standard of living.
There is nothing about the flat orldnothingthat Americans cannot handle, as long as we roll up our leeves, educate our young people the right way for these times, and tend to nd enrich the secrets of our sauce.
So are we doing that?
That's what the ext two chapters are about.
But let me give you a hint: The answer is no.
IGHT he Quiet Crisis lose games for the Americans were rare in previous Olympics, but now it ap ears to be something the Americans should get used to.
From an August 17, 2004, AP article from the Athens Olympics titled U.S. Men's Basketball Team Narrowly Beats Greece" hinese pity comes from their belief that we are a country in decline.
More than  few Chinese friends have quoted to me the proverb fu bu guo san dai (wealth oesn't make it past three generations) as they wonder how we became so illdisciplined, distracted and dissolute.
The fury surrounding Monica-gate seemed n incomprehensible waste of time to a nation whose emperors were supplied ith thousands of concubines.
Chinese are equally astonished that Americans re allowing themselves to drown in debt and under-fund public schools while he media focus on fights over feeding tubes, displays of the Ten Commandments nd how to eat as much as we can without getting fat.
James McGregor, a journalist-turned-businessman based in China, and a ormer chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China, riting in The Washington  ost, July 31, 2005 u could find no better metaphor for the way the rest of the world an now compete head-to-head more effectively than ever with merica than the struggles of the U.S. Olympic basketball team n 2004.
The American team, made up of NBA stars, limped home to a HE  O R L D IS F L A T ronze medal after losing to Puerto Rico, Lithuania, and Argentina.
reviously, the United States Olympic basketball team had lost only one ame in the history of the modern Olympics.
Remember when America ent only NCAA stars to the Olympic basketball events?
For a long time hese teams totally dominated all comers.
Then they started getting chal enged.
So we sent our pros.
And they started getting challenged.
Because he world keeps learning, the diffusion of knowledge happens faster; oaches in other countries now download American coaching methods ff the Internet and watch NBA games in their own living rooms on satel ite TV.
Many of them can even get ESPN and watch the highlight reels.
nd thanks to the triple convergence, there is a lot of new raw talent alking onto the NBA courts from all over the world including many ew stars from China, Latin America, and Eastern Europe.
They go ack and play for their national teams in the Olympics, using the skills hey honed in America.
So the automatic American superiority of twenty ears ago is now gone in Olympic basketball.
The NBA standard is in reasingly becoming a global commoditypure vanilla.
If the United tates wants to continue to dominate in Olympic basketball, we must, in hat great sports clich, step it up a notch.
The old standard won't do any ore. As Joel Cawley of IBM remarked to me, "Star for star, the basket all teams from places like Lithuania or Puerto Rico still don't rank well ersus the Americans, but when they play as a teamwhen they collab rate better than we dothey are extremely competitive."
portswriter John Feinstein could have been referring to either merican engineering skills or American basketball skills when he wrote n an August 26, 2004, AOL essay on Olympic basketball that the perfor ance of the U.S. basketball team is a result of "the rise of the interna ional player" and "the decline and fall of the U.S.
game."
And the ecline and fall of the U.S. game, argued Feinstein, is a result of two ong-term trends.
The first is a steady decline "in basketball skills," with merican kids just wanting either to shoot three-point shots or to unk the sort of stuff that gets you on the highlight reel on ESPN's portsCenter instead of learning how to make precise passes, or go into he lane and shoot a pull-up jumper, or snake through big men to get to he basket.
Those skills take a lot of hard work and coaching to learn.
HE QUIET CRISIS oday, said Feinstein, you have an American generation that relies al ost completely on athleticism and almost not at all on basketball skills.
nd there is also that ugly little problem of ambition.
While the rest of he world was getting better in basketball, "more and more NBA players ere yawning at the notion of playing in the Olympics," noted Feinstein.
We have come a long way from 1984, when Bob Knight told Charles arkley to show up to the second Olympic training camp at 265 pounds r else.
Barkley showed up weighing 280.
Knight cut him that day.
In to ay's world, the Olympic coach wouldn't even have checked Barkley's eight in the first place.
He would have sent a limousine to the airport to et him and stopped at Dunkin' Donuts on the way to the hotel if the layer requested it.
The world changes.
In the case of American bas etball, it hasn't changed for the better."
here is something about post-World War II America that reminds e of the classic wealthy family that by the third generation starts to quander its wealth.
The members of the first generation are nose-to-thegrindstone innovators or entrepreneurs; the second generation holds it ll together; then their kids come along and get fat, dumb, and lazy and lowly squander it all.
I know that is both overly harsh and a gross gener lization, but there is nevertheless some truth in it.
American society tarted to coast in the 1990s, when our third postwar generation came of ge.
The dot-com boom left too many people with the impression that hey could get rich without investing in hard work.
All it took was an BA and a quick IPO, or one NBA contract, and you were set for life.
ho needed an education?
Who needed to sweat over an engineering egree?
But while we were admiring the flat world we had created, a lot f people in India, China, and Eastern Europe were busy figuring out ow to take advantage of it.
Lucky for us, we were the only economy tanding after World War II, and we had no serious competition for forty ears.
That gave us a huge head of steam but also gradually bred a sense f entitlement and a culture of complacency.
That is, a pronounced ten ency in recent years to extol consumption over hard work and in estment, immediate gratification over long-term thinking and sacrifice.
hen we got hit with 9/11, it was a once-in-a-generation opportunity to ummon the nation to sacrifice, to address some of its pressing fiscal,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nergy, science, and education shortfallsall the things that we had let lide.
But our president did not summon us to sacrifice.
He summoned s to go shopping.
n the previous chapters, I tried to explain why both classic economic heory and the inherent strengths of the American economy leave me con inced that Americans can thrive and claim the jobs of the new middle  rovided we get ready to compete, get every individual to think about how e or she can upgrade his or her educational skills, and keep investing in he secrets of America's sauce.
This chapter is about why we are not doing hose things and what will happen if we don't change course.
e truth is, we're in a crisis now, but it is a crisis that is unfolding ery quietly.
We're a bit like a person who is sleeping on an air mat ress, and the air is slowly coming outso slowly you barely feel it, until our head hits the cement.
By then, it's really hard to reinflate the mat ress.
It is "a quiet crisis," explained Shirley Ann Jackson, the 2004 presi ent of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and resident of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute since 1999.
(Rensselaer is merica's oldest technological college, founded in 1824.)
And this quiet risis involves the steady erosion of America's scientific and engineering ase, which has long been the source of American innovation and our ising standard of living.
The sky is not falling, nothing horrible is going to happen today," said ackson, a physicist by training who chooses her words carefully.
"The .S.
is still the leading engine for innovation in the world.
It has the best raduate programs, the best scientific infrastructure, and the capital mar ets to exploit it.
But there is a quiet crisis in U.S. science and technology hat we have to wake up to.
The U.S. today is in a truly global environ ent, and those competitor countries are not only wide awake, they are unning a marathon while we are running sprints.
If left unchecked, this ould challenge our preeminence and capacity to innovate."
hirley Ann Jackson knows of what she speaks, because her career ex mplifies as well as anyone's both why America thrived so much in the ast fifty years and why it won't automatically do the same in the next HE QUIET CRISIS ifty.
An African-American woman, Jackson was born in Washington,  .
C , in 1946.
She started kindergarten in a segregated public school ut was one of the first public school students to benefit from desegrega ion, as a result of the Supreme Court ruling in Brown v. Board of Edu ation.
Just when she was getting a chance to go to a better school, the ussians launched Sputnik in 1957, and the U.S. government became bsessed with educating young people to become scientists and engi eers, a trend that was intensified by John F. Kennedy's commitment to  manned space program.
When Kennedy spoke about putting a man n the moon, Shirley Ann Jackson was one of the millions of American oung people who were listening.
His words, she recalled, "inspired, as isted, and launched many of my generation into science, engineering, nd mathematics," and the breakthroughs and inventions they spawned ent well beyond the space program.
"The space race was really a sci nce race," she said.
hanks in part to desegregation, both Jackson's inspiration and intel ect were recognized early, and she ultimately became the first AfricanAmerican woman to earn a Ph.D. in physics from MIT (her degree was n theoretical elementary particle physics).
From there, she spent many ears working for AT&T Bell Laboratories, and in 1995 was appointed by resident Clinton to chair the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
s the years went by, though, Jackson began to notice that fewer and ewer young Americans were captivated by national challenges like the ace to the moon, or felt the allure of math, science, and engineering.
In niversities, she noted, graduate enrollment in science and engineering rograms, having grown for decades, peaked in 1993, and despite some ecent progress, it remains today below the level of a decade ago.
So the cience and engineering generations that followed Jackson's got smaller nd smaller relative to our needs.
By the time Jackson took the job as ensselaer Polytechnic's president to put her heart and soul into reinvigorating American science and engineering, she realized that a "per ect storm" was brewingone that posed a real long-term danger to merica's economic health and she started speaking out about it.
The phrase 'the perfect storm' is associated with meteorological events n October 1991," said Jackson in a speech in May 2004, when "a powerful  H E W O R L D IS F L A T eather system gathered force, ravaging the Atlantic Ocean over the ourse of several days, [and] caused the deaths of several Massachusettsbased fishermen and billions of dollars of damage.
[Meteorologists em hasized] the unlikely confluence of conditions [which] converged to ring about an event of devastating magnitude.
[A] similar worst-case cenario could arrest the progress of our national scientific and techno ogical capacity.
The forces at work are multiple and complex.
They are emographic, political, economic, cultural, even social."
At heart, this erfect storm involves the collision of an older generation of American ngineers and scientists who are retiring at the same time that a younger eneration is not stepping into their shoes in sufficient numbersand at he same time that the foreigners who used to make up the difference are ither staying home or being kept out of America for security reasons.
ndividually, each of these forces would be problematic, added Jackson.
n combination, they could be devastating.
"For the first time in more han a century, the United States could well find itself falling behind ther countries in the capacity for scientific discovery, innovation, and conomic development."
lthough knowledge has always mattered, it matters more than ever oday.
As economist Jeffrey Sachs has pointed out, until the scientific rev lution began in the seventeenth century, virtually everyone everywhere as living on the edge of subsistence.
But after three centuries of tech ological and scientific advances, subsistence is no longer the norm.
team power, machine tools, electricity, and ultimately computers and he Internet have enabled individuals to become vastly more productive.
o now the Industrial Age and the Information Age are giving way to the alent Age.
The flattening of the world has brought the tools of the ndustrial Age and the Information Age to more people and places than ver.
As these tools have become commodities, widely dispersed to every ne, business strategist John Hagel III noted, the "only sustainable edge" or companies and countries is the distinctive talents and entrepreneurship of their workforce.
Economics can always be win-win.
But those ho will win the most today, added Hagel, will be those who are best and astest at attracting talent.
hat is why I insist that wealth in the age offlatnesswill increasingly HE UIET CRISIS ravitate to those countries who get three basic things right: the infra tructure to connect as efficiently and speedily as possible with the flat orld platform, the right education programs and knowledge skills to em ower more of their people to innovate and do value-added work on that latform, and,finally,the right governancethat is, the right tax policies, he right investment and trade laws, the right support for research, the ight intellectual property laws, and, most of all, the right inspirational eadershipto enhance and manage the flow with the flat world.
nfortunately, the United States has serious gaps developing in all of hese areas.
In the Cold War, one of the deepest concerns of American ociety was the putative missile gap between us and the Soviet Union, hich threatened America from outside.
Today we should be con erned about the gaps in our education, infrastructure, and ambitions hat threaten to weaken us from within.
These gaps are our dirty little se rets.
If we continue to ignore them, then this won't be a quiet crisis any ore, said Rensselaer's Jackson, "it will be the real McCoy."
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #1: THE NUMBERS GAP  rty little secret number one is that the generation of scientists and ngineers who were motivated to go into science by the threat of putnik in 1957 and the inspiration of JFK are reaching their retirement ears and are not being replaced in the numbers that they must be if an dvanced economy like that of the United States is to remain at the head f the pack.
According to the National Science Foundation, half of merica's scientists and engineers are forty years or older, and the aver ge age is steadily rising.
ust take one exampleNASA.
An analysis of NASA records con ucted by the newspaper Florida Today (March 7, 2004), which covers he Kennedy Space Center, showed the following: Nearly 40 percent of he 18,146 people at NASA are age fifty or older.
Those with twenty years f government service are eligible for early retirement.
Twenty-two per ent of NASA workers arefifty-fiveor older.
NASA employees over sixty  H E W O R L D IS F L A T utnumber those under thirty by a ratio of about three to one.
Only 4 per ent of NASA workers are under thirty.
A 2003 Government Accounting ffice study concluded that NASA was having difficulty hiring people ith the sufficient science, engineering, and information-technology kills that are critical to its operations.
Many of these jobs are reserved for merican citizens, because of national security concerns.
Then-NASA dministrator Sean O'Keefe testified before Congress in 2002: "Our mis ion of understanding and protecting our home planet and exploring the niverse and searching for life will not be carried out if we don't have the eople to do it."
The National Commission on Mathematics and Science eaching for the Twenty-first Century, chaired by the former astronaut nd senator John Glenn, found that two-thirds of the nation's mathemat cs and science teaching force will retire by 2010. raditionally we made up for any shortages of engineers and science aculty by educating more at home and importing more from abroad.
ut both of those remedies have been stalled of late.
very two years the National Science Board supervises the collection f a very broad set of data trends in science and technology in the United tates, which it publishes as Science and Engineering Indicators.
In reparing Indicators 2004, the NSB said, "We have observed a troubling ecline in the number of U.S. citizens who are training to become sci ntists and engineers, whereas the number of jobs requiring science and ngineering (S&E) training continues to grow."
These trends threaten he economic welfare and security of our country, it said, adding that if he trends identified in Indicators 2004 continue undeterred, three hings will happen: "The number of jobs in the U.S. economy that re uire science and engineering training will grow; the number of U.S. cit zens prepared for those jobs will, at best, be level; and the availability of eople from other countries who have science and engineering training ill decline, either because of limits to entry imposed by U.S. national ecurity restrictions or because of intense global competition for people ith these skills."
he NSB report found that the number of American eighteen- to wenty-four-year-olds who receive science degrees has fallen to seven eenth in the world, whereas we ranked third three decades ago.
It said HE QUIET CRISIS hat of the 2.8 million first university degrees (what we call bachelor's de rees) in science and engineering granted worldwide in 2003, 1.2 mil ion were earned by Asian students in Asian universities, 830,000 were ranted in Europe, and 400,000 in the United States.
In engineering pecifically, universities in Asian countries now produce eight times as any bachelor's degrees as the United States.
oreover, "the proportional emphasis on science and engineering is reater in other nations," noted Shirley Ann Jackson.
Science and engi eering degrees now represent 60 percent of all bachelor's degrees arned in China, 33 percent in South Korea, 41 percent in Taiwan  nd roughly 31 percent in the United States.
The United States has al ays depended on the inventiveness of its people in order to compete in he world marketplace, said the NSB.
"Preparation of the S&E work orce is a vital arena for national competitiveness.
[But] even if action is aken today to change these trends, the reversal is 10 to 20 years away."
he students entering the science and engineering workforce with ad anced degrees in 2004 decided to take the necessary math courses to en ble this career path when they were in middle school, up to fourteen ears ago, the NSB noted.
The students making that same decision in iddle school today won't complete advanced training for science and ngineering occupations until 2018 or 2020.
"If action is not taken now o change these trends, we could reach 2020 and find that the ability of .S.
research and education institutions to regenerate has been dam ged and that their preeminence has been lost to other areas of the orld," the science board said.
hese shortages could not be happening at a worse timejust when he world is going flat.
"The number of jobs requiring science and engi eering skills in the U.S. labor force," the NSB said, "is growing almost 5 ercent per year.
In comparison, the rest of the labor force is growing at ust over 1 percent.
Before September 11, 2001, the Bureau of Labor tatistics (BLS) projected that science and engineering occupations ould increase at three times the rate of all occupations."
Unfortunately, he NSB reported, the average age of the science and engineering work orce is rising.
Many of those who entered the expanding S&E workforce in the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T 960s and 1970s (the baby boom generation) are expected to retire in the ext twenty years, and their children are not choosing science and engi eering careers in the same numbers as their parents," the NSB report aid.
"The percentage of women, for example, choosing math and com uter science careers fell 4 percentage points between 1993 and 1999."
he 2002 NSB indicators showed that the number of science and engi eering Ph.D.'s awarded in the United States dropped from twenty-nine housand in 1998 to twenty-seven thousand in 1999.
The total number f engineering undergraduates in America fell about 12 percent between he mid-1980s and 1998. evertheless, America's science and engineering labor force grew at a ate well above that of America's production of science and engineering egrees, because a large number of foreign-born S&E graduates migrated o the United States.
The proportion of foreign-born students in S&E ields and workers in S&E occupations continued to rise steadily in the 990s.
The NSB said that persons born outside the United States ac ounted for 14 percent of all S&E occupations in 1990.
Between 1990 nd 2000, the proportion of foreign-born people with bachelor's degrees n S&E occupations rose from 11 to 17 percent, the proportion of foreignborn with master's degrees rose from 19 to 29 percent, and the proportion f foreign-born with Ph.D.'s in the S&E labor force rose from 24 to 38 ercent.
By attracting scientists and engineers born and trained in other ountries, we have maintained the growth of the S&E labor force with ut a commensurate increase in support for the long-term costs of train ng and attracting native U.S citizens to these fields, the NSB said.
ut now, the simultaneous flattening and wiring of the world have ade it much easier for foreigners to innovate without having to emi rate.
They can now do world-class work for world-class companies at ery decent wages at home.
As Allan E. Goodman, president of the nstitute of International Education, put it, "When the world was round, hey could not go back home, because there was no lab to go back to and o Internet to connect to.
But now all those things are there, so they are oing back.
Now they are saying, 'I feel more comfortable back home.
I an live more comfortably back home than in New York City and I can o good work, so why not go back?'
" This trend started even before the HE QUIET CRISIS isa hassles brought on by 9/11, said Goodman.
"The brain gain started o go to brain drain around the year 2000."
s the NSB study noted, "Since the 1980s other countries have in reased investment in S&E education and the S&E workforce at higher ates than the United States has.
Between 1993 and 1997, the O E C D ountries [Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development,  group of forty nations with highly developed market economies] in reased their number of S&E research jobs 23 percent, more than twice he 11 percent increase in S&E research jobs in the United States."
n addition, it said, visas for students and S&E workers have been is ued more slowly since the events of September 11, owing to both in reased security restrictions and a drop in applications.
The U.S. State epartment issued 20 percent fewer visas for foreign students in 2001 than n 2000, and the rate fell further in subsequent years.
While university pres dents told me in 2004 that the situation was getting better, and that the epartment of Homeland Security was trying to both speed up and sim lify its visa procedures for foreign students and scientists, a lot of damage as been done, and the situation for foreign students or scientists wanting o work in any areas deemed to have national security implications is be oming a real problem.
No wonder New York Times education writer Sam illon reported on December 21, 2004, that "foreign applications to merican graduate schools declined 28 percent this year.
Actual foreign raduate student enrollments dropped 6 percent.
Enrollments of all for ign students, in undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral programs, fell or the first time in three decades in an annual census released this fall.
eanwhile, university enrollments have been surging in England, ermany and other countries... Chinese applications to American grad ate schools fell 45 percent this year, while several European countries an ounced surges in Chinese enrollment."
ome analysts have argued that it can be very misleading to quote the ross number of engineers graduating every year in India, China, and the nited Statesand therefore conclude that America must be falling ehindbecause accurate statistics are not only hard to come by, they of en ignore the different quality of engineering degrees in the respective ountries.
For instance, a December 2005 study by Duke University's  H E W O R L D IS F L A T aster of Engineering Management Program, entitled "Framing the ngineering Outsourcing Debate: Placing the United States on a Level laying Field with China and India," concluded that the Indian and hinese numbers often include graduates from less rigorous two- or hree-year training programswhile the U.S. numbers usually capture nly accredited four-year bachelor degree programs.
The Duke study also ifferentiates between two groups of engineering graduates, what it calls dynamic engineers" and "transactional engineers."
Dynamic engineers, t says, "are individuals capable of abstract thinking and high-level prob em solving using scientific knowledge."
These dynamic engineers usu lly come out of at least four-year, accredited engineering programs, and heir jobs are not easily outsourced.
Transactional engineers, who often eceive associate, technician, or diploma awards rather than bachelor's de rees, may possess engineering fundamentals, but not the experience or xpertise to apply this knowledge to larger problems, the Duke study said.
hese jobs can be easily outsourced.
America, the Duke study con luded, is still producing a relatively high proportion of dynamic engi eers and computer scientists compared to India and China, and herefore remains very competitive.
would add the following caveat to this caveat, though.
First, I would et that many of the engineering degrees being granted by American uni ersities are going not to American citizens but to foreign students, who ill return to their home countries.
Second, yes, the average engineering egree in India or China today may not be the same quality as at the aver ge accredited four-year American university.
But let me put this in very imple language: There are many more Indians and Chinese than there re Americans and a much, much higher percentage of them are studying cience, computer science, and engineeringin their home countries nd in American universities.
In a flat world, best practices travel fast.
So I ave no doubt that within the next twenty years the average quality of un ergraduate engineering degrees in China and India will start to mirror the merican average.
Look at the trend lines, not today's snapshot.
HE UIET CRISIS IRTY L I T T L E SECRET #2: HE E D U C A T I O N GAP ATT H E TOP  e most important reason for the numbers gap, of course, is our ed cation gap.
We simply are not educating, or even interesting, nough of our own young people in advanced math, science, and engi eering.
Consider the annual worldwide Intel International Science and ngineering Fair.
About forty countries participate by nominating talent hrough local affiliate affairs.
In 2004, the Intel Fair attracted around ixty-five thousand American kids, according to Intel.
How about in hina?
I asked Wee Theng Tan, the president of Intel China, during a isit to Beijing.
In China, he told me, there is a national affiliate science air, which acts as a feeder system to select kids for the global Intel fair.
Almost every single province has students going to one of these affiliate airs," said Tan.
"We have as many as six million kids competing, al hough not all are competing for the top levels... [But] you know how eriously they take it.
Those selected to go to the international [Intel] fair re immediately exempted from college entrance exams," and basically et their choice of any top university in China.
In the 2004 Intel Science air, China came home with thirty-five awards, more than any other ountry in Asia, including one of the top three global awards.
o wonder that Education Week, which is read by teachers all over merica, ran an article (July 28, 2004) with the headline "Immigrants' hildren Inhabit the Top Ranks of Math, Science Meets."
It said: "Re earch conducted by the National Foundation for American Policy hows that 60 percent of the nation's top science students and 65 percent f the top mathematics students are children of recent immigrants, ac ording to an analysis of award winners in three scholastic competi ions .
the Intel Science Talent Search, the U.S. team for the nternational Mathematical Olympiad, and the U.S. Physics Team."
he study's author, Stuart Anderson, attributed the immigrant students' uccess "partly to their parents' insistence that they manage study time isely," Education Week said.
"Many immigrant parents also encouraged heir children to pursue mathematics and science interests, believing hose skills would lead to strong career opportunities and insulate them  H E W O R L D IS F L A T rom bias and lack of connections in the workplace .
A strong percent ge of the students surveyed had parents who arrived in the United States n H-1B visas, reserved for professional workers.
U.S. policymakers who ack overly restrictive immigration policies do so at the risk of cutting off  steady infusion of technological and scientific skill," said Anderson, the xecutive director of the foundation.
The article quoted Andrei Munteanu, eighteen, a finalist for the 2004 Intel competition, whose parents ad moved from Romania to the United States five years earlier.
unteanu started American public school in the seventh grade and found t a breeze compared to his Romanian school.
"The math and science lasses [covered the same subject matter] I was taking in Romania... hen I was in fourth grade," he said.
elp does not appear to be on the way.
Every four years the United tates takes part in the Trends in International Mathematics and Science tudy, which assesses students after fourth grade and eighth grade.
ltogether, the most recent study involved roughly a half million stu ents from forty-one countries and the use of thirty languages, making it he largest and most comprehensive international study of education hat has ever been undertaken.
he 2004 results (for tests taken in 2003) showed American students aking only marginal improvements over the 2000 results, which re ealed the American labor force to be weaker in science than those of its eer countries.
The Associated Press reported (December 4, 2004) that merican eighth graders had improved their scores in science and math ince 1995, when the test first was given, but their math improvement ame mainly between 1995 and 1999, and not in recent years.
The rising cores of American eighth graders in science were an improvement over 999 and lifted the United States to a higher ranking relative to other ountries.
The worrying news, though, was that the scores of American ourth graders were stagnant, neither improving nor declining in science r math since 1995.
As a result, the United States slipped in the interna ional rankings as other countries made gains.
"Asian countries are setting he pace in advanced science and math," Ina Mullis, codirector of the nternational Study Center at Boston College, which manages the study, old the AP.
"As one example, 44 percent of eighth-graders in Singapore HE QUIET CRISIS cored at the most advanced level in math, as did 38 percent in Taiwan.
nly 7 percent in the United States did."
Results from another interna ional education test also came out in December 2004, from the Pro ram for International Student Assessment.
It showed that American ifteen-year-olds are below the international average when it comes to ap lying math skills to real-life tasks.
hat may be partly explained by a 2005 study by the National Academy f Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of edicine titled "Rising Above the Gathering Storm."
It found that in 999, only 41 percent of American eighth-grade students received in truction from a mathematics teacher who specialized in mathematics, onsiderably lower than the international average of 71 percent.
The ed cation in American junior high schools, in particular, seems to be a lack hole that is sapping the interest of young people, particularly oung women, when it comes to the sciences.
October 2005, my wife and I went up to New Haven to attend par nts' weekend at Yale.
We went out for a pizza lunch with our daugh er and her roommates, and one roommate's boyfriend.
I sat across from he boyfriend, Eric Stern, twenty-four, who was getting a Ph.D. from ale in biomedical engineering, with an expertise in nanotechnology.
ric is precisely the sort of young person we want the American educa ion system to keep churning out.
His grandfather was a watchmaker, his ather a medical doctor and science professor at Columbia, and so he got nterested in science at a very young age in part from hanging around n his father's lab and in part by building things with his grandfather.
He as a Westinghouse science finalist in high school, got his undergradu te degree at Yale, and was speeding his way through graduate school, orking on a government-funded project using nanotechnology to de ect various toxins in the air, which could have wide application in the ar on terrorism.
Stern and I immediately fell into conversation about he state of science education in America today.
or starters, he said, "Look around at this table," motioning to the five ale undergraduate women.
"I am sitting at a table eating pizza with all  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hese smart women, and it never occurred to them to do science."
They ere all in the humanities.
Why?
I asked Stern.
There were a variety of easons, and they applied to both young women and men in America to ay, he said.
To begin with, "People want to do stuff that is fun.
But there s no fun in algebra or memorizing the multiplication tables.
But [those undamentals] eventually become freshman chemistry.
And that's bor ng too.
You can't say anything good about it.
So it's not until you get to he senior level of advanced classes that you can start to have fun.
But ou need to have acquired all these fundamentals beforehand .
and etting those fundamentals is not fun .
The culture now is geared oward having fun."
peaking of Yale, Stern told me, "I love it here, but none of my riends were really interested in what I did and, if I wanted to communi ate what I did, man, I really had to make it interesting.
[Yale's] business s making presidents, and they are great at it.
It is not making scientists.
ut the presidents they make don't value the sciences, because they on't hang out with those kidsand who epitomizes that more than ush?"
Stern added, "I was at a wedding recently, and all my college uddies were there who are now [investment] bankers, and they were alking about how much they made.
And I started figuring out how uch I make, and it came to about $3 an hour for working eighty hours  week.
But I never really think about it that way."
t appears that young Americans wanting to be lawyers started to wamp those wanting to be engineers and scientists in the 1970s and arly 1980s.
Then, with the dot-com boom, those wanting to go to busi ess school and earn MBAs swamped engineering students and lawyers n the 1990s.
tern said he believed that American culture is still producing some f the most creative scientists and engineers, though other societies are losing the gap due to their dedication to teaching fundamentals and heir newfound interest in instilling more creative approaches to educa ion in their systems.
Which is why, added Stern, as important as it is for merican kids to upgrade their foundational skills in math and science, e have to do it without giving up those things in our culture that also in pire and instill creativity.
In that vein, he argued, it is crazy to see public HE QUIET CRISIS chools getting rid of art and music programs.
"One very formative part f my life that led to creative thinking as well as a work ethic was music," e said.
"I was a serious classical musician, which definitely teaches hard orkand, for that matter, hard work all on your own, not like practic ng with a sports team.
But it also teaches you to interpret themes and deas in new ways to make them your own."
hank goodness American society still produces young men like Eric tern, but we should have no illusions: He and his scientific colleagues re a minority that is getting smaller.
In American society today, added tern, "the highest thing you can be is a doctor or lawyer or investment ankernot an engineer or scientist."
What worries him, he added, is here is the innovation going to happen?
Are we going to be trading our stuff, or China's stuff?"
he asked.
"I ant to make sure we are trading our stuff."
But that gets back to the need or our people to have sound fundamentals.
So much of science and en ineering is about work ethic the willingness not only to slog through ll the fundamentals but also to stick with an experiment even when it ails the first twenty times, said Stern.
The thing that impresses him most bout the Asian students, and the best American ones, he concluded, is heir work ethic.
"When a Chinese graduate student comes up to me in he lab and says, 'How do you work so hard?'
that is the best compliment  can get."
wish more young Americans felt that way, but the statistics say oth rwiseand the problem is not just with math and science.
It's now in ecting plain old reading and writing.
On December 16, 2005, The New ork Times carried a story reporting that the average American college raduate's literacy in English had declined significantly over the past ecade, according to a widely respected nationwide test.
This is college rads not dropouts!
"The National Assessment of Adult Literacy, given n 2003 by the Department of Education, is the nation's most important est of how well adult Americans can read," the Times said.
"The test also ound steep declines in the English literacy of Hispanics in the United tates, and significant increases among blacks and Asians.
When the test as last administered, in 1992, 40 percent of the nation's college gradu tes scored at the proficient level, meaning that they were able to read HE  O R L D IS F L A T engthy, complex English texts and draw complicated inferences.
But on he 2003 test, only 31 percent of the graduates demonstrated those highlevel skills.
There were 26.4 million college graduates... Grover J. hitehurst, director of an institute within the Department of Education hat helped to oversee the test, said he believed that the literacy of college raduates had dropped because a rising number of young Americans in ecent years had spent their free time watching television and surfing the nternet.
'We're seeing substantial declines in reading for pleasure, and t's showing up in our literacy levels,' he said."
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #3: THE AMBITION AP  A u r love of television and video and online games helps to explain  y o u r third dirty little secret, one that several prominent American EOs would tell me only in a whisper.
It goes like this: When they send obs abroad, they not only save 75 percent on wages, they get a 100 per ent increase in productivity.
In a sense, that's understandable.
When ou take a low-wage, low-prestige job in America, like a call center oper tor, and bring it over to India, where it becomes a high-wage, highprestige job, you end up with workers who are paid less but motivated ore. "The dirty little secret is that not only is [outsourcing] cheaper and fficient," the American C E O of a London-headquartered multinational old me, "but the quality and productivity [boost] is huge."
In addition to he wage compression, he said, one Bangalore Indian employee will do he work of two or three Europeans, and the Bangalore employees don't ake six weeks of holidays.
"When you think it's only about wages," he dded, "you can still hold your dignity, but the fact that they work better s awful.'
short time after returning from India, I was approached in an air ort by a young man who wanted to talk about some columns I had writ en from there.
We had a nice chat, I asked him for his card, and we truck up an e-mail friendship.
His name is Mike Arguello, and he is an T systems architect living in San Antonio.
He does high-end IT systems HE QUIET CRISIS esign and does not feel threatened by foreign competition.
He al eaches computer science.
When I asked him what we needed to do merica to get our edge back, he sent me this e-mail:  taught at a local university.
It was disheartening to see the poor ork ethic of many of my students.
Of the students I taught over ix semesters, I'd only consider hiring two of them.
The rest acked the creativity, problem-solving abilities and passion for earning.
As you well know, India's biggest advantage over the hinese and Russians is that they speak English.
But it would be rong to assume the top Indian developers are better than their merican counterparts.
The advantage they have is the number f bodies they can throw at a problem.
The Indians that I work ith are the cream of the crop.
They are educated by the equiva ents of MIT back in India and there are plenty of them.
If you ere to follow me in my daily meetings it would become very ob ious that a great deal of my time is spent working with Indians.
ost managers are probably still under the impression that all ndians are doing is lower-end software development"software ssembly."
But technologies, such as Linux, are allowing them to tart taking higher-paying system design jobs that had previously een the exclusive domain of American workers.
It has provided hem with the means to move up the technology food chain, utting them on par with domestic workers.
It's brain power gainst brain power, and in this area they are formidable.
From a echnology perspective, the world is flat and getting flatter (if that s possible).
The only two areas that I have not seen Indian labor n are networking architects and system architects, but it is only a atter of time.
Indians are very bright and they are quickly learn ng from their interaction with system architects just how all of the ieces of the IT puzzle fit together .
Were Congress to pass leg slation to stop the flow of Indian labor, you would have major oftware systems that would have nobody who knew what was go ng on.
It is unfortunate that many management positions in IT re filled with non-technical managers who may not be fully  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ware of their exposure .
I'm an expert in information systems, ot economics, but I know a high-paying job requires one be able o produce something of high value.
The economy is producing he jobs both at the high end and low end, but increasingly the igh-end jobs are out of reach of many.
Low education means ow-paying jobs, plain and simple, and this is where more and ore Americans are finding themselves.
Many Americans can't elieve they aren't qualified for high-paying jobs.
I call this the American Idol problem."
If you've ever seen the reaction of con estants when Simon Cowell tells them they have no talent, they ook at him in total disbelief.
I'm just hoping someday I'm not iven such a rude awakening.
ut the trouble starts in high school, if not sooner.
In the summer of 005, I received the following letter from Malcolm Davidson, a high chool teacher in Washington State: ear Mr. Friedman, I teach fifth grade reading and social studies at he Annie Wright School, a private school in Tacoma, Washington.
hile many of the families I teach are ethnically diverse and well ducated, most are white, upper middle class American families.
I ecently finished your new book "The World Is Flat."
Two of the hapters, "The Triple Convergence" and "The Quiet Crisis," I ex erienced years ago, long before you wrote them.
Reading them ade me realize that the world was flat.
I wish that I could have hared these thoughts with you before you wrote these two chap ers.
Parent conferences are one of the more interesting aspects of y job; I never realized that they were such a cultural study, hough.
Two parent conferences two years ago were my flat earth oment.
One conference was with Deven and Swati Vora.
(Guess here the Vora family immigrated from?)
As we chatted about their aughter Sonia, they told me not only did our school not give nough homework but also that it wasn't challenging enough.
ater that day in another conference, Irena Mikeladze, an immi rant from Eastern Europe, wanted to know why her son Timothy HE QUIET CRISIS ad no science book and such a flimsy science curriculum.
How ould we be a competitive school when we didn't have a science ook?
Representing two different national characters, the three par nts made me think.
Sadly, many... white, American, middle lass parents [told me] that the 5th grade work was too hard on their ids.
They couldn't possibly complete it and have time to "be a kid."
occer, gymnastics, [music] lessons and dinner out squeezed their ducation time.
Some parents would ask for my colleagues and e to lighten the load.
These worrisome parents merely set low ex ectations for children by running interference; the scary par nts .
think everything is great and never demand more.
If their ids do OK and have fun, then they must be getting a great educa ion.
Our schools tend to live back in an 11/9 mindset.
I know as a chool, my school compares itself with schools down the road or in he next town.
If my students' parents believe that we are better han the local public, parochial and private schools, then they are ontent.
As you wrote, and I realized in the two conferences, the eal competition is not from the next town or the neighboring state ny more.
You're rightin many ways we are fooling ourselves.
In n academic sense we lost our hunger (except for cheerleading nd football and failing bond measures).
We're complacent and eaded for trouble.
Sadly, national leadership is worried about not eaving kids behind, and states like Kansas and Georgia seem more oncerned with eliminating Darwin and adding intelligent design.
f one puts his ear to the flat Earth, one can hear the competition rom overseas.
My goal as an educator is to stop being the best lo al school, or regional school, and start being the best on the lanet.
ssentially, before the world started getting flattened, the United tates was an islandan island of innovation and safety and growing ncomes.
And therefore it became a magnet for the world's capital and he world's talent.
When your currency is the world's currency and very brain wants to come over and work in your backyard, you start to ake things for granted.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T sian countries have not had that luxury.
In the winter of 20041 had tea n Tokyo with Richard C. Koo, chief economist for the Nomura Research nstitute.
I tested out on Richard my "coefficient offlatness,"the notion hat the flatter one's country isthat is, the fewer natural resources it has he better off it will be in a flat world.
The ideal country in a flat world is he one with no natural resources, because countries with no natural re ources tend to dig inside themselves.
They try to tap the energy, entrepreneurship, creativity, and intelligence of their own peoplemen and omenrather than drill an oil well.
Taiwan is a barren rock in a typhoonladen sea, with virtually no natural resourcesnothing but the energy, mbition, and talent of its own peopleand today it has the third-largest inancial reserves in the world.
The success of Hong Kong, Japan, South orea, and coastal China can all be traced to a similar flatness.
I am a Taiwanese American with a father from Taiwan and with a apanese mother," Koo told me.
"I was born in Japan and went to Japa ese elementary school and then moved to the States.
There is a saying n China that whatever you put in your head and your stomach, no one an take away from you.
In this whole region, that is in the DNA.
You ust have to study hard and move forward.
I was told relatively early by my eachers, 'We can never live like Americans and Canadians.
We have no esources.
We have to study hard, work hard, and export hard.'"
short time later I read a column by Steven Pearlstein, The Wash ngton Post's business columnist/reporter, under the headline "Europe's apitalism Curtain."
From Wroclaw, Poland (July 23, 2004), Pearlstein rote: "A curtain has descended across Europe.
On one side are hope, ptimism, freedom and prospects for a better life.
On the other side, fear, essimism, suffocating government regulations and a sense that the best imes are in the past."
This new curtain, Pearlstein argued, demarks astern Europe, which is embracing capitalism, and Western Europe, hich is wishing desperately that it would go away.
This time, however, it is the East that is likely to prevail," he contin ed.
"The energy and sense of possibility are almost palpable here .
oney and companies are pouring in not just the prestige nameplates ike Bombardier, Siemens, Whirlpool, Toyota and Volvo, but also the etwork of suppliers that inevitably follows them.
Atfirst,most of the new HE UIET CRISIS obs were of the semi-skilled variety.
Now they have been followed by de ign and engineering work that aims to tap into the largest concentration f university students in Eastern Europe .
..
The secret isn't just lower ages.
It's also the attitude of workers who take pride and are willing to do hat is necessary to succeed, even if it means outsourcing parts produc ion or working on weekends or altering vacation schedulesthings that ould almost certainly trigger months of acrimony and negotiation in estern Europe.
'The people back home, they haven't got any idea how uch they need to change if they want to preserve what they have,' said os Ugarte [a Basque who heads the appliance manufacturing opera ions of Mondragon, the giant Spanish industrial cooperative].
'The dan er to them is enormous.
They don't realize how fast this is appening .
.'
It's not the dream of riches that animates the people of roclaw so much as the determination to work hard, sacrifice what eeds to be sacrificed and change what needs to be changed to close the ap with the West.
It is that pride and determination, says Wroclaw's ayor, Rafal Dutkiewicz, that explain why they are such a threat to the eisure-time society' on the other side of the curtain."
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #4: HE E D U C A T I O N GAP A TT H E B O T T O M   you look back to America in the first third of the last century, you will ind the roots of the public education system we have todaya system hat is now outmoded for a flat world.
Back in the early twentieth century, merica decided to organize its education system by delegating the power nd responsibility for education to local school boards.
We basically al owed each community to organize its own school system, with its own ap roach to teaching and textbooks, and its own salary structuresas pposed to doing it either on a national level, as most countries do, or on  state level as, say, Germany does.
The net effect of this approach, argues arc Tucker, president of the National Center on Education and the conomy, was a patchwork system in which we delegated education  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ower to local school boards "organized by wealth."
That is, "these school oard districts were essentially organized around patterns of residents," xplained Tucker.
"So it made it possible for relatively wealthy people to rganize into self-taxing districts.
And that meant that wealthy people, by ssociating with each other, could tax themselves at relatively low rates nd still produce very high per capita per student school budgets" be ause of their bigger homes and higher property tax assessments.
If you ent to the other end of the spectrum, you found relatively poor people ssociated with each other in school districts, paying a much larger por ion of their income in school taxes but nevertheless winding up with very ow per-pupil expenditures.
And in those communities you also had very igh social noise and low expectations.
his was greatly reinforced by the advent of home mortgage subsidies nd the highway construction subsidies after World War II, noted Tucker, hich combined to create the suburbs as we know them.
As a result, de pite the gains of the civil rights movement, the 1960s witnessed growing e facto racial segregation in the schools, as white families with children argely abandoned the cities, leaving behind what we now know is an ven more segregated (by race and class) city.
All these postwar develop ents combined to create large metropolitan areas in the United States urrounded by suburbs that can be arrayed along a finely graded scale of ace and class, in most cases with matching school districts.
ithout any question the wealthiest school districts attracted the best eachers, principals, and curriculum planners, along with the most de anding parents and PTAs, while the poorest districts attracted the weak st teachers and principals and parents who had to work three jobs just to urvive (leaving them with less time to help their kids with their home ork).
By contrast, other industrialized countries fund their schools ac ording to what it will take to deliver a standard curriculum, and then hey take the money out of the state s general budget.
mericans have always wanted and expected their public schools to e the agent of social mobility, the principal means by which poor eople can lift themselves up by their bootstraps to grab the American rass ring.
But that is no longer the reality in too many parts of the coun ry today, because of the disparities in funding.
HE UIET CRISIS he reason America has managed to get by with this systemforso long, dded Tucker, was that beginning in the 1930s, when the mass-production conomy became dominant, "we were actually doing something very effi ient.
We were educating a group of mass production workers at the level hey needed and we poured money into the elite who could innovate."
So f you went to an elite private school or a public school in a wealthy neigh orhood, you got an education that reinforced innovation and creativity, hile the worst public high schools focused on just getting kids through ith the bread-and-butter basics.
That was all fine as long as there were a ot of basic bread-and-butter mass-production jobs, paying decent wages, aiting on the other side of the high school gates.
nfortunately, as the world has flattened out, those mass-production obs are increasingly being automated or outsourced.
There are fewer and ewer decent jobs for those without a lot of knowledge.
There are several merican cities, for instance, where thirty years ago the biggest employer as a manufacturing plant and today it is a medical center or a technol gy hub.
So a poorly funded and staffed high school today is a pathway to  dead end.
"There is no future down there anymore," said Tucker.
Therefore, we have to find a way to educate all of our young people to a ery high standard.
Otherwise, if you don't upgrade their skills, the only ay the low-skilled can compete is by driving down their wages."
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #5: THE FUNDING GAP  r now, the United States still excels at teaching science and engi eering at the graduate level, and also in university-based research.
ut as the Chinese get more feeder stock coming up through their im roving high schools and universities, "they will get to the same level as s after a decade," said Intel chairman Craig Barrett.
"We are not gradu ting the volume, we do not have a lock on the infrastructure, we do not ave a lock on the new ideas, and we are either flat-lining, or in real dol ars cutting back, our investments in physical science."
ontinued American technological leadership in building the jobs of  H E W O R L D IS F L A T omorrow, added Barrett, requires "a commitment to basic research fund ng today."
Unfortunately, the 2004 Task Force on the Future of American nnovation found that federal funding for research in physical and mathe atical sciences and engineering, as a share of GDP, actually declined by 7 percent between 1970 and 2004.
In the fiscal year 2005 budget passed y the Republican-led Congress in November 2004, the budget for the ational Science Foundation, which is the federal body most responsible or promoting research and funding more and better science education, as actually cut by 1.9 percent, or $105 million.
History will show that hen America should have been doubling the NSF funding, its Congress assed a pork-laden budget that actually cut assistance for science and en ineering.
There was tiny improvement in the fiscal 2006 budgetan in rease of 2.4 percent.
The Department of Energy's Office of Science, the ost important funder of physics research in America, got only a 2.9 per ent increase in fiscal 2005 and a 0.9 percent boost in 2006, which mounts to a budget cut after inflation.
This is outrageous.
n his January 2006 State of the Union address, President Bush vowed o reverse this decline in a big way.
We'll see.
What should we be doing?
he October 2005 National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of ngineering, and Institute of Medicine report, "Rising Above the athering Storm," which was put together by a blue-ribbon panel of sci ntists and entrepreneurs, concluded that for America to be prepared for he twenty-first century, it must increase federal investment in such re earch by 10 percent a year over the next seven years.
It also recom ended new research grants, each of $500,000 a year for five years, to be iven to two hundred of the most outstanding early-career researchers.
epublican congressman Vern Ehlers of Michigan, a voice in the wilder ess, said the following, after Congress cut the NSF's 2005 budget: While I understand the need to make hard choices in the face of fiscal onstraint, I do not see the wisdom in putting science funding behind ther priorities .
Not only are we not keeping pace with inflationary rowth, we are actually cutting the portion basic research receives in the verall budget.
This decision shows dangerous disregard for our nation's uture, and I am both concerned and astonished that we would make this HE UIET CRISIS ecision at a time when other nations continue to surpass our students in ath and science and consistently increase their funding of basic re earch.
We cannot hope to fight jobs lost to international competition ithout a well-trained and educated workforce."
he effects are starting to show.
According to the National Science oard, the percentage of scientific papers written by Americans has allen 10 percent since 1992.
The percentage of American papers pub ished in the top physics journal, Physical Review, has fallen from 61 per ent to 29 percent since 1983.
And now we are starting to see a surge in atents awarded to Asian countries.
From 1980 to 2003, Japan's share of orld industrial patents rose from 12 percent to 21 percent, and Taiwan's rom 0 percent to 3 percent.
By contrast, the U.S. share of patents has allen from 60 percent to 52 percent since 1980. ongress has a long history of wasting money on pork barrel highway rojects.
From now on, let's waste our money on test tube projects in teadjust in case.
IRTY LITTLE SECRET #6: HE INFRASTRUCTURE GAP  omas Bleha, a former U.S. foreign service officer who was based in apan, wrote a telling article for Foreign Affairs (May-June 2005) hat began like this: "In the first three years of the Bush Administration, he United States dropped from 4th to 13th place in the global rankings f broadband Internet usage.
Today, most U.S. homes can access only basic' broadband, among the slowest, most expensive, and least reliable n the developed world, and the United States has fallen even further be ind in mobile-phone-based Internet access.
The lag is arguably the re ult of the Bush Administration's failure to make a priority of developing hese networks.
In fact, the United States is the only industrialized state ithout an explicit national policy for promoting broadband."
ince it took over in 2001, the Bush team has made clear that its prior-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ties are tax cuts, missile defense, and the war on terrorismnot keeping he United States at the forefront of Internet innovation.
Things have ac ually gotten worse since Bleha wrote his article, based on 2004 statistics.
ccording to the data released in April 2005 by the International Tele ommunication Union (ITU), Americas global broadband penetration ropped from thirteenth place to sixteenth.
The ITU ranked the United tates at 11.4 broadband subscribers per 100 inhabitants as of December 1, 2004, which is less than half that of South Koreathe most wired ountry in the worldwith 24.9 broadband subscribers per 100 inhabi ants.
"Norway, Israel and Finland each surpassed the United States in roadband penetration for thefirsttime," the National Journal reported on pril 25, 2005.
"And an aggressive rollout in France almost pushed the .S.
even lower.
High-speed Internet use in France doubled from 5.61 ubscribers per 100 inhabitants at the end of 2003 to 11.2 per 100 last year, utting the nation at 17th, just one notch below the United States."
n the current administration's first three years, noted Bleha, President eorge W. Bush mentioned broadband just twice and only in passing.
Not nly that, but what the United States measures as broadband service200 bps-"wouldn't cut the mustard in much of the rest of the world," noted ark Lloyd, writing in the daily Progress Report for the Center for merican Progress (October 7, 2004).
In Japan, for instance, consumers ay the equivalent of $10 a month for service forty times as fast as 200 Kbps.
he smartest countries, and cities, in the world are offering their residents ot just the fastest broadband, but at the lowest prices to the widest areas.
hy should Americans care?
roadband and information technologies are important not only be ause they are big global businesses in and of themselves, but also ecause they are critical to advancing productivity and innovation in very sector in the economy.
The more you connect an educated popu ation to the flat-world platform in an easy and affordable way, the more hings they can automate, and therefore the more time and energy they ave to innovate.
The more they innovate, the more they produce things hat improve the platform.
It is a virtuous cycle, one that you always want o encourage to the greatest degree possible.
f the flat-world platform makes innovation and production so much HE UIET CRISIS ore efficient, "but your people can't take advantage of it, because they on't have the infrastructure or the education to do so," remarked Craig undie of Microsoft, "then sooner or later you are going to get hosed."
HE OTTOM INE  en I asked Bill Gates about the supposed American education dvantagean education that stresses creativity, not rote learninghe was utterly dismissive.
In his view, the people who think that the more ote-oriented learning systems of China and Japan can't turn out innova ors who can compete with Americans are sadly mistaken.
Said Gates, *'I ave never met the guy who doesn't know how to multiply who created oftware .
Who has the most creative video games in the world?
Japan!
I ever met these 'rote people'...
Some of my best software developers are apanese.
You need to understand things in order to invent beyond them."
ne cannot stress enough: Young Chinese, Indians, and Poles are ot racing us to the bottom.
They are racing us to the top.
They do not ant to work for us; they don't even want to be us.
They want to domi ate usin the sense that they want to be creating the companies of the uture, ones that people all over the world will admire and clamor to ork for.
They are in no way content with where they have come so far.
was talking to a Chinese American who worked for Microsoft and had ccompanied Bill Gates on visits to China.
He said Gates is recognized verywhere he goes in China.
Young people there hang from the rafters nd scalp tickets just to hear him speak.
Same with Jerry Yang, the cofounder of Yahoo!
n China today, Bill Gates is Britney Spears.
In America today, Britney pears is Britney Spearsand that is our problem.
nd no wonder.
Johns Hopkins University president Bill Brody re arked to me, "Over 60 percent of our graduate students in the sciences at Hopkins] are foreign students, and mostly from Asia.
At one point four ears ago all of our graduate students in mathematics were from the PRC Communist China].
I only found out about it because we use them as  H E W O R L D IS F L A T teaching assistants] and some of them don't speak English all that well."
Johns Hopkins parent wrote Brody to complain that his son could not nderstand his calculus professor because of his heavy Chinese accent nd poor English.
here is an old techie adage that in places like China and Japan the ail that stands up gets hammered, while in Silicon Valley the nail that tands up drives a Ferrari and has stock options.
Underlying that adage has lways been a certain American self-confidence that whatever America acks in preparing its kids with strong fundamentals in math and science, t makes up by encouraging its best students to be independent, creative hinkers.
There is a lot of truth to that.
Even the Chinese will tell you that p to now they have been good at making the next new thing, and copying he next new thing, but not imagining the next new thing.
That may be bout to change, though.
Confident that their best K-12 students will sually outperform America's on the fundamentals of math and science, hina is now focusing on how to unleash more creative, innovative uices among its youth.
n October 2005, on a visit to Beijing, I interviewed Wu Qidi, China's ice minister of education.
Here's what she told me over tea in her office n the Ministry of Educationthe newest and nicest government build ng in Beijing today: "Although we are enjoying a very fast growth of our conomy, we own very little intellectual property.
We are so proud of hina's four great inventions [in the past]: the compass, papermaking, rinting, and gunpowder.
But in the following centuries we did not keep p that pace of invention.
Those inventions fully prove what the hinese people are capable of doingso why not now?
We need to get ack to that nature."
urturing more "creative thinking and entrepreneurship are the ex ct issues we are putting attention to today," added Vice Minister Wu.
es, this is easier said than done.
It bumps head-on into a Chinese cul ure and politics that still emphasize conformity.
But do not kid yourself: ultures can change.
And China is changing, particularly as more and ore young Chinese are educated in America and Europe.
Ever since the policy of reform and opening up, we are seeing a arge number of scholars and teachers and professors going abroad," said HE QUIET CRISIS ice Minister Wu, "and they are in the process of evolving and changing nd they have imparted these changes to their students in classrooms.
nd now we are seeing that the world is changing and the Internet is hanging our world so fast...
I believe that arts will play an important ole.
It is even more important to have an integration in arts and science o people will have the creative and independent thinking .
Among he teachers, some of them are not well trained to get the integration of rts and science."
he sounded to me just like Wayne Clough of Georgia Tech.
And that s the point.
China is focused on overcoming its weaknessesbeginning ith creative thinkingto match our strengths.
t will take time, probably longer than China thinks.
But when one ooks at what China has been doing at the very top, I have no doubt that t will get where it wants to go.
Let me take you for a little tour of Micro oft Research Asia, the research center that Bill Gates set up in Beijing to raw on Chinese brainpower.
Microsoft has four major research centers n the world: in Cambridge, England; in Redmond, Washington, its eadquarters; in Beijing; and most recently in Bangalore, India.
Bill ates told me that within just a couple of years of its opening in 1998, icrosoft Research Asia had become the most productive research arm n the Microsoft system "in terms of the quality of the ideas that they are urning out.
It is mind-blowing."
n China, where there are 1.3 billion people and the universities are ust starting to crack the top ranks, the competition for top spots is fero ious.
The math/science salmon that swims upstream in China and gets tself admitted to a top Chinese university or hired by a foreign company s one smart fish.
The folks at Microsoft have a saying about their re earch center in Beijing, which, for scientists and engineers, is one of the ost desirable places to work in all of China.
"Remember, in China hen you are one in a millionthere are thirteen hundred other people ust like you."
n other words, the brainpower that rises to the Microsoft research enter in Beijing is already one in a million.
ai-Fu Lee, who has since left Microsoft, was originally assigned to uild the Microsoft research center in Beijing.
My first question to him  H E W O R L D IS F L A T as, "How did you go about recruiting the staff?"
Lee said his team went o universities all over China and simply administered math, IQ, and rogramming tests to Ph.D.-level students or scientists.
In the first year, we gave about 2,000 tests all around," he said.
From he 2,000, they winnowed the group down to 400 with more tests, then 50, "and then we hired 20."
They were given two-year contracts and told hat at the end of two years, depending on the quality of their work, they ould either be given a longer-term contract or granted a postdoctoral de ree by Microsoft Research Asia.
Yes, you read that right.
The Chinese gov rnment gave Microsoft the right to grant postdocs.
Of the original twenty ho were hired, twelve survived the cut.
The next year, nearly four thou and people were tested.
After that, said Lee, "we stopped doing the test.
By hat time we became known as the number one place to work, where all he smart computer and math people wanted to work .
We got to know ll the students and professors.
The professors would send their best people here, knowing that if the people did not work out, it would be their credi ility [on the line].
Now we have the top professors at the top schools rec mmending their top students.
A lot of students want to go to Stanford or IT, but they want to spend two years at Microsoftfirst,as interns, so they an get a nice recommendation letter that says these are MIT quality."
hey view this as "a once-in-a-lifetime income opportunity," said Lee f the team at Microsoft Research Asia.
"They saw their parents going hrough the Cultural Revolution.
The best they could do was become a rofessor, do a little project on the side because a professor's pay is horri le, and maybe get one paper published.
Now they have this place where ll they do is research, with great computers and lots of resources.
They ave administratorswe hire people to do the dirty work.
They just ould not believe it.
They voluntarily work fifteen to eighteen hours a ay and come in on weekends.
They work through holidays, because heir dream is to get to Microsoft."
Lee, who had worked for other Ameri an high-tech firms before coming to Microsoft, said that until starting icrosoft Research Asia, he had never seen a research lab with the en husiasm of a start-up company.
oday it has two hundred full-time researchers.
Harry Shum, the HE QUIET CRISIS arnegie Mellon-trained engineer who now runs Microsoft Research Asia, as a very clear view of what Chinese innovators can do when given the right nvironment.
ACM Siggraph is the premier global conference for computer raphics and interactive technologies.
At Siggraph 2005, a total of ninetyeight papers were published from universities and research institutes all over he world.
Nine of themalmost 10 percentcame from Microsoft's eijing office alone, beating out MIT and Stanford.
Said Shum: "In 1999, e had one paper published.
In 2000, we had one.
In 2001, we had two.
In 002, we had four.
In 2003 we had three.
In 2004, we had five, and this year e are very lucky to have nine."
Do you see a pattern developing?
n addition, Microsoft Research Asia has already contributed more han one hundred new technologies for current Microsoft products  rom Xbox to Windows.
It's a huge leap in seven years, but, outside of othouses like Microsoft, China still has a way to go.
A Chinese journalist once asked me, 'Harry, tell me honestly, what s the difference between China and the U.S.?
How far is China behind?'
joked, 'Well, you know, the difference between China high tech and merican high tech is only three months if you don't count creativity.'
hen I was a student in China twenty years ago we didn't even know hat was happening in the U.S. Now, any time an MIT guy puts up omething on the Internet, students in China can absorb it in three onths.
But could someone here create it?
That is a whole other issue.
I earned mostly about how to do research right at Carnegie Mellon .
efore you create anything new you need to understand what is already here.
Once you have this foundation, being creative can be trainable.
hina is building that foundation.
So very soon, in ten or twenty years, ou will see a flood of top-quality research papers from China."
nce more original ideas start emerging here, though, China will till need more venture capital and the rule of law to get them to market.
Some aspects of Chinese culture did not encourage independent think ng," said Shum.
(Obviously, I would add, the Communist political tructure also doesn't promote free thinking in every direction, either.)
But with venture capital coming into this country, it will definitely nspire a new generation of Chinese entrepreneurs.
I will be teaching a  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lass at Tsinghua University next year on how to do technology-based entures .
You have technology in [Chinese] universities, but people on't know what to do with ithow to marketize it."
ome of his young Chinese researchers demonstrated their new re earch prototypes for me.
I noticed that several of them had little granite locks lined up on their shelves.
I asked one of them, who had seven or ight on her shelf, "What are those?"
She said the researchers get them rom Microsoft every time they invent "something that gets patented."
ow do you say Ferrari in Chinese?
December 15, 2004, the Council on Competitiveness hosted a ational Innovation Initiative Summit at the Ronald Reagan uilding in Washington, D.C., to release its long-term study "Innovate merica: Thriving in a World of Challenge and Change"a detailed ipartisan analysis by America's leading technologists and industrialists bout how to re-energize American competitiveness through more re earch, education, and innovation.
Several months after the report came ut, the Council on Competitiveness was contacted by the Chinese em assy in Washington and told that China's vice minister of science and echnology would be visiting and would like to invite council members for  lunch.
Deborah Wince-Smith, the energetic president of the Council on ompetitiveness, told me that her colleagues were happy to share their eport with the Chinese visitor, as they had with other foreign delega ions.
But it wasn't necessary.
He said that they had already translated the report and were plan ing to integrate it into their twenty-year strategic plan," said WinceSmith, adding that while the council had taken the initiative to share heir report with other countries, "the Chinese came to uswe didn't ome to them."
They had clearly been following the council's work, hich is published on its Web site, very closely.
Wince-Smith said these ays she is wondering "whether we are going to implement [the Innovate merica report] or China is going to beat us to our own plan."
on't laugh.
The day the Innovate America report was released to HE QUIET CRISIS he public in Washington, the authors, who, as I said, were a very highpowered group of American educators and business leaders, begged the hite House to have President Bush attend the ceremony, in the hope hat he would use his bully pulpit to highlight their report and draw na ional attention to it.
The president's aides refused the request, appar ntly because they thought it would dilute his message of the day.
nd where was President Bush speaking that day?
He was literally own the hall, in the very same Reagan Building, at the exact same time he Innovate America report was being issued.
And what was the presi ent doing that was more important?
He was holding his own economic ummit, speaking to a carefully selected audience that included many epublican campaign donors, to push his ultimately failed plan to partially rivatize Social Security.
The president spoke against a backdrop that was rinted with the words "Securing Our Economic Future."
So there was he president trying to take apart the old New Dealjust when he should ave been using his office to promote a New New Deal for the twenty-first entury.
And down the hall, a bipartisan group headed by Sam Palmisano, EO of IBM, and G. Wayne Clough, president of Georgia Tech, was of ering up just such a New New Deal agenda at a National Innovation ummit and the president could not devote five minutes to it.
But the hinese immediately translated it.
I am not making this up.
short while later I spoke with Craig Barrett, the Intel chairman, ho seemed exasperated that Washington, including both political par ies, didn't seem to really grasp this quiet crisis or at least not with the rgency that was required.
We will hire the talent wherever it resides," said Barrett.
"We still ave some good students coming out of our schools."
But if you look at here Intel is making a lot of its new engineering-level investments, he dded, it's in four or five countriesRussia, China, and India and to a esser extent Malaysia and Israel.
These and other emerging markets are lso where Intel is selling more and more of its chips.
hen Barrett added something about Intel that is so true in a flat orld, but nevertheless shocking to many Americans.
Intel, he said, can hrive as a company "even if we never hire another American."
He was  H E W O R L D IS F L A T uick to add that this is not Intel's intent or desire.
"And we still do hire ots of Americans," said Barrett.
"But today we can hire the best talent round the world and be very successful."
ntel has to seek IQ (and C Q and PQ) wherever it can, because that s what its competitors are doing.
Remember, said Tracy Koon, Intel's irector of corporate affairs, Intel's chips are made from just two things and and brains (silicon comes from sand) "and right now the brains re the problem .
We will need a stronger and more supportive immi ration system if we want to hire the people who want to stay here.
therwise, we will go where they are.
What are the alternatives?
I am not alking about data programmers or [people with] B.S.
degrees in com uter science.
We are talking about high-end specialized engineering.
e have just started a whole engineering function in Russia, where en ineers have wonderful trainingand talk about underemployed!
We re beefing that up.
Why wouldn't you?"
hat is Shirley Ann Jackson's perfect stormwe don't let the talent n from abroad as much as we used to, the growing opportunities for our est companies shift more and more to foreign markets, and we don't do  better job educating our own kids to fill the gaps.
If that storm comes to ass, American companies, like Intel, will just lift off American soil like ocket ships.
They will hover over America.
We will think of them as merican companies, because they will be listed on the New York Stock xchange and have post office boxes here, but they really will be flatworld companies.
Where innovation happens really does matter, be ause that is where the best jobs are going to be located, and those best obs spin off more good jobs and decent jobs in every community.
It mat ers that Microsoft is headquartered in Redmond, Washington.
It matters hat Google is headquartered in Mountain View, California.
And one ay it will matter if they aren't.
Standard of living is related to the average value add of your work orce," said Barrett, "and that is related to average educational level of your orkforce.
If you downgrade the average educational level of your work orce, relative to your competition, your standard of living will decline."
ook at the high-profile attention Congress has devoted to steroids in ajor-league baseball, Barrett said, and compare that with the attention it HE QUIET CRISIS as focused on the crisis in science education in major-league American ities.
How long did it take us to have congressional hearings on steroids n major-league baseball?
Almost immediately after the scandal broke.
he science crisis?
That can wait.
Congress has pork to distribute.
The resident has other priorities.
As my wife likes to tell me," said Barrett, "when you study history and ook at every civilization that has grown up and died off, they all leave one emnanta major sports coliseum at the heart of their capital."
ur fate can be different, but only if we start doing things differently.
t takesfifteenyears to train a scientist or advanced engineer, starting from hen that young man or woman first gets hooked on science and math in lementary school.
Therefore, we should be embarking immediately on n all-hands-on-deck, no-holds-barred, no-budget-too-large crash program or science and engineering education.
Scientists and engineers don't row on trees.
They have to be educated through a long process, because, adies and gentlemen, this really is rocket science.
he fact that we have not been doing this is a crisis.
It may be a creep ng and quiet crisis, but it is here and it is real.
And as Paul Romer, the tanford economist, has so perceptively warned: A crisis is a terrible thing to waste."
INE his Is Not a Test e have the power to shape the civilization that we want.
But we need your will, our labor, your hearts, if we are to build that kind of society.
Those who came o this land sought to build more than just a new country.
They sought a new orld.
So I have come here today to your campus to say that you can make their ision our reality.
So let us from this moment begin our work so that in the fu ure men will look back and say: It was then, after a long and weary way, that an turned the exploits of his genius to the full enrichment of his life.
Lyndon B. Johnson, "Great Society" speech, 1964 ost politicians here don't know the difference between a server and a waiter.
hat's why kids in South Korea have better Internet access than kids in the south ronx.
Andrew Rasiej, candidate in 2005 for New York City's office of ublic advocate, trying to run on a platform focused on upgrading New York ity's IT infrastructure (he was not elected)   a person who grew up during the Cold War, I'll always remem er driving along down the highway and listening to the radio, hen suddenly the music would stop and a grim-voiced an ouncer would come on the air and say, "This is a test of the Emergency roadcast System," and then there would be a thirty-second high-pitched iren sound.
Fortunately, we never had to live through a moment in the  H I S IS N O T A T E S T old War where the announcer came on and said, "This is not a test."
hat, however, is exactly what I want to say here: This is not a test he long-term opportunities and challenges that the flattening of the orld puts before the United States are profound.
Therefore, our ability o get by doing things the way we've been doing themwhich is to say, ot always tending to our secret sauce and enriching itwill not suffice nymore.
"For a country as wealthy as we are, it is amazing how little we re doing to enhance our natural competitiveness," said Dinakar Singh, he Indian-American hedge fund manager.
"We are in a world that has a ystem that now allows convergence among many billions of people, and e had better step back and figure out what it means.
It would be a nice oincidence if all the things that were true before are still true nowbut here are quite a few things you actually need to do differently .
You eed to have a much more thoughtful national discussion."
f this moment has any parallel in American history, it is the height of he Cold War, around 1957, when the Soviet Union leaped ahead of merica in the space race by putting up the Sputnik satellite.
Yes, there are any differences between that age and our own.
The main challenge then ame from those who wanted to put up walls; the main challenge to merica today comes from the fact that all the walls are being taken down, nd other countries can now compete with us much more directly.
The ain challenge in that world was from those practicing extreme ommunismnamely, Russia, China, and North Korea.
The main chal enge to America today is from those practicing extreme capitalism  amely, China, India, and South Korea.
The main objective in that era as building a strong state; the main objective in this era is building strong ndividuals.
hat this era has in common with the Cold War era, though, is that eeting the challenges of flatism requires as comprehensive, energetic, nd focused a response as did meeting the challenge of communism.
It equires our own version of the New Frontier and Great Society adapted o the age offlatness.It requires a president who can summon the nation o get smarter and study harder in science, math, and engineering in or er to reach the new frontiers of knowledge that the flat world is rapidly pening up and pushing out.
And it requires a Great Society that com-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T its our government to building the infrastructure, safety nets, and insti utions that will help every American become more employable in an ge when no one can be guaranteed lifetime employment.
I call my own ersion of this approach "compassionate flatism."
etting Americans to rally around compassionate flatism is much more ifficult than getting them to rally around anticommunism.
"National peril s a lot easier to convey than individual peril," noted Johns Hopkins niversity foreign policy expert Michael Mandelbaum.
Economics, as oted, is not like war, because economics can always be a win-win game.
ut sometimes I wish economics were more like war.
In the Cold War, e actually got to see the Soviets parade their missiles in Red Square.
We ll got to be scared together, from one end of the country to the other, nd all our politicians had to be focused and serious about marshaling he resources and educational programs to make sure Americans could eep pace with the Soviet Union.
ut today, alas, there is no missile threat coming from India.
The "hot ine," which used to connect the Kremlin with the White House, has een replaced by the "help line," which connects everyone in America to all centers in Bangalore.
While the other end of the hotline might have ad Leonid Brezhnev threatening nuclear war, the other end of the help ine just has a soft voice eager to help you sort out your AOL bill or col aborate with you on a new piece of software.
No, that voice has none of he menace of Nikita Khrushchev pounding a shoe on the table at the N, and it has none of the sinister snarl of the bad guys in From Russia ith Love.
There is no Boris or Natasha saying, "We will bury you" in a hick Russian accent.
No, that voice on the help line just has a friendly ndian lilt that masks any sense of threat or challenge.
It simply says, Hello, my name is Rajiv.
Can I help you?"
o, Rajiv, actually, you can't.
hen it comes to responding to the challenges of the flat world, here is no help line we can call.
We have to dig into ourselves.
We in merica have all the tools to do that, as I argued in Chapter 7.
But, as I rgued in Chapter 8, we have not been tending to those tools as we hould.
Hence, our quiet crisis.
The assumption that because America's conomy has dominated the world for more than a century, it will and  H I S IS N O T A T E S T ust always be that way is as dangerous an illusion today as the illusion hat America would always dominate in science and technology was ack in 1950.
But this is not going to be easy.
Getting our society up to peed for a flat world is going to involve a lot of pain.
We are going to have o start doing a lot of things differently.
It is going to take the sort of focus nd national will that President John F. Kennedy called for in his famous ay 25, 1961, speech to Congress on "urgent national needs."
At that ime, America was recovering from the twin shocks of Sputnik and the oviet space launch of a cosmonaut, Yuri Gagarin, less than two months efore Kennedy's speech.
Kennedy knew that while America had enor ous human and institutional assets far more than the Soviet Union  hey were not being fully utilized.
I believe we possess all the resources and talents necessary," said resident Kennedy.
"But the facts of the matter are that we have never ade the national decisions or marshaled the national resources re uired for such leadership.
We have never specified long-range goals on n urgent time schedule, or managed our resources and our time so as to nsure their fulfillment."
After then laying out his whole program for utting a man on the moon within ten years, President Kennedy added, Let it be clear that I am asking the Congress and the country to accept  firm commitment to a new course of action, a course which will last for any years and carry very heavy costs.. .
This decision demands a ma or national commitment of scientific and technical manpower, materiel nd facilities, and the possibility of their diversion from other important ctivities where they are already thinly spread.
It means a degree of ded cation, organization and discipline which have not always characterized ur research and development efforts."
n that speech, Kennedy made a vow that has amazing resonance oday: "I am therefore transmitting to the Congress a new Manpower evelopment and Training program, to train or retrain several hundred housand workers, particularly in those areas where we have seen chronic nemployment as a result of technological factors, in new occupational kills over a four-year periodin order to replace those skills made obso ete by automation and industrial change with the new skills which the ew processes demand."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T men.
We too have to do things differently.
We are going to have to ort out what to keep, what to discard, what to adapt, what to adopt, where o redouble our efforts, and where to intensify our focus.
That is what this hapter is about.
This is just an intuition, but the flattening of the world is oing to be hugely disruptive to both traditional and developed societies.
he weak will fall further behind faster.
The traditional will feel the force f modernization much more profoundly.
The new will get turned into ld quicker.
The developed will be challenged by the underdeveloped uch more profoundly.
I worry, because so much political stability is uilt on economic stability, and economic stability is not going to be a fea ure of the flat world.
Add it all up and you can see that the disruptions are oing to come faster and harder.
No one is immune not me, not you, ot Microsoft.
We are entering an era of creative destruction on steroids.
ealing with flatism is going to be a challenge of a whole new dimension, ven if your country has a strategy.
But if you don't have a strategy at all.. .
ell, again, you've been warned.
his is not a test.
eing an American, I am especially concerned about my own coun ry.
How do we go about maximizing the benefits and opportunities of he flat world, and providing protection for those who have difficulty with he transition?
Some will offer traditional conservative responses; some ill offer traditional liberal ones.
I offer compassionate flatism.
Compas ionate flatism is my definition of what it means to be a progressive in a lat world.
I start with the assumption that, barring some geopolitical ex losion, the world is going to get more and more globalized and flat ened, as surely as dawn will follow dusk.
The job of government and oliticians in such a flattening world is more important than ever.
It is to mbrace globalization and understand that a fairer, more compassion te, and more egalitarian society lies in a web of policies aimed not at trengthening the old welfare state or in abolishing it and just letting he market rip but at reconfiguring it to give more Americans the out ook, education, skills, and safety nets they will need to compete against ther individuals in the flat world.
In short, the one thing government an't do is promise to insulate American workers against the volatility of he global labor market in a flat world.
But the one thing it must do is  H I S IS N O T A T E S T quip American workers with more tools and social supports to reduce he new pressures of global competition.
That is what compassionate latism stands for, and it is built around five action areas: leadership, mus le building, cushioning, social activism, and parenting.
EADERSHIP  e job of the politician in America, whether at the local, state, or na ional level, should be, in good part, to help educate and explain to eople what world they are living in and what they need to do if they want o thrive within it.
One problem we have today, though, is that so many merican politicians don't seem to have a clue about the flat world.
As enture capitalist John Doerr once remarked to me, "You talk to the lead rship in China, and they are all the engineers, and they get what is going n immediately.
The Americans don't, because they're all lawyers."
dded Bill Gates, "The Chinese have risk-taking down, hard work down, ducation, and when you meet with Chinese politicians, they are all sci ntists and engineers.
You can have a numeric discussion with them  ou are never discussing give me a one-liner to embarrass [my political ivals] with.'
You are meeting with an intelligent bureaucracy."
hen China's prime minister, Wen Jiabao, visited India for the first ime in April 2005, he didn't fly into the capital, New Delhias foreign eaders usually do.
He flew directly from Beijing to Bangalorefor a ech-tourand then went on to New Delhi.
No U.S. president or vice resident has ever visited Bangalore.
I am not saying we should require ll politicians to hold engineering degrees, but it would be helpful if they ad a basic understanding of the forces that are flattening the world, ere able to educate constituents about them and galvanize a response.
e have way too many politicians in America today who seem to do the pposite.
They seem to go out of their way actually to make their con tituents stupid encouraging them to believe that certain jobs are American jobs" and can be protected from foreign competition, or that ecause America has always dominated economically in our lifetimes it  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lways will, or that compassion should be equated with protectionism.
It s hard to have an American national strategy for dealing with flatism f people won't even acknowledge that there is an education gap emerg ng and that there is an ambition gap emerging and that we are in a quiet risis.
For instance, of all the policy choices that the Republican-led ongress could have made in forging the FY 2005 budget, how in the orld could it have decided to cut the funding of the National Science oundation by more than $100 million?
e need politicians who are able and willing to both explain and in pire.
And what they most need to explain to Americans is pretty much hat Lou Gerstner explained to the workforce of IBM when he took over s chairman in 1993, when the company was losing billions of dollars.
At he time, IBM was facing a near-death experience owing to its failure to dapt to and capitalize on the business computing market that it in ented.
IBM got arrogant.
It had built its whole franchise around helping ustomers solve problems.
But after a while it stopped listening to its cus omers.
It thought it didn't have to.
And when IBM stopped listening to ts customers, it stopped creating value that mattered for its customers, nd that had been the whole strength of its business.
A friend of mine ho worked at IBM back then told me that when he was in hisfirstyear t the company and was taking an internal course, his IBM instructor oasted to him that IBM was such a great company, it could do "extraor inary things with just average people."
As the world started to flatten, hough, IBM found that it could not continue thriving with an over bundance of average people working for a company that had stopped eing a good listener.
ut when a company is the pioneer, the vanguard, the top dog, the rown jewel, it is hard to look in the mirror and tell itself it is in a not-soquiet crisis and better start to make a new history or become history.
erstner decided that he would be that mirror.
He told IBM it was ugly nd that a strategy built largely around designing and selling computers ather than the services and strategies to get the most out of those com uters for each customerdidn't make sense.
Needless to say, this was a hock for IBMers.
Transformation of an enterprise begins with a sense of crisis or  H I S IS N O T A T E S T rgency/' Gerstner told students at Harvard Business School, in a Decem er 9, 2002, talk.
"No institution will go through fundamental change nless it believes it is in deep trouble and needs to do something differ nt to survive."
It is impossible to ignore the parallel with America as a hole in the early twenty-first century.
hen Lou Gerstner came in, one of the first things he did was re lace the notion of lifetime employment with the notion of lifetime employability.
A friend of mine, Alex Attal, a French-born software engineer ho was working for IBM at the time, described the shift this way: Instead of IBM giving you a guarantee that you will be employed, you ad to guarantee that you could stay employable.
The company would ive you the framework, but you had to build it yourself.
It's all about dapting.
I was head of sales for IBM France at the time.
It was the midnineties.
I told my people that in the old days [the concept of] lifetime mployment was only a company's responsibility, not a personal respon ibility.
But once we move to a model of employability, that becomes a hared responsibility.
The company will give you access to knowledge, ut you have to take advantage of i t .
You have to build the skills be ause it will be you against a lot of other people."
hen Gerstner started to change the paradigm at IBM, he kept tressing the issue of individual empowerment.
Said Attal, "He under tood that an extraordinary company could only be built on a critical ass of extraordinary people."
s at IBM, so in America.
Average Joe has to become special, spe ialized, synthesizing, or adaptable Joe.
The job of government and busi ess is not to guarantee anyone a lifetime jobthose days are over.
That ocial contract has been ripped up with the flattening of the world.
What overnment can and must guarantee people is the chance to make them elves more employable.
We don't want America to be to the world what BM was becoming to the computer industry in the 1980s: the people ho opened the field and then became too timid, arrogant, and ordinary o play on it.
We want America to be the born-again IBM.
xplaining a new challenge, though, is not just diagnosing the prob em for people and telling them the truth about how we are falling be ind.
It is also opening their minds to the power of new technologies to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T olve old problems.
There is more to political leadership than a compe ition for who can offer the most lavish safety nets.
Yes, we must address eople's fears, but we must also nurse their imaginations.
Politicians can ake us more fearful and thereby be disablers, or they can inspire us and hereby be enablers.
o be sure, it is not easy to get people passionate about the flat world.
t takes some imagination.
President Kennedy understood that the com etition with the Soviet Union was not a space race but a science race, hich was really an education race.
Yet the way he chose to get mericans excited about sacrificing and buckling down to do what it took o win the Cold Warwhich required a large-scale push in science and ngineeringwas by laying out the vision of putting a man on the moon, ot a missile into Moscow.
If President Bush is looking for a similar legacy roject, there is one just crying outa national science initiative that ould be our generation's moon shot: a crash program for alternative en rgy and conservation to make America energy-independent in ten years.
f President Bush made energy independence his moon shot, in one fell woop he would dry up revenue for terrorism, force Iran, Russia, Vene uela, and Saudi Arabia onto the path of reformwhich they will never o with $60-a-barrel oilstrengthen the dollar, and improve his own tanding in Europe by doing something huge to reduce global warming.
e would also create a real magnet to inspire young people to contribute o both the war on terrorism and America's future by again becoming sci ntists, engineers, and mathematicians.
"This is not just a win-win," said ichael Mandelbaum.
"This is a win-win-win-win-win."
have consistently been struck that my newspaper columns that have otten the most positive feedback, especially from young people, have een those that urged the president to call the nation to this task.
ummoning all our strengths and skills to produce a twenty-first-century enewable energy source is George W. Bush's opportunity to be both ixon going to China and JFK going to the moon in one move.
Mr. ush tautly acknowledged this with his 2006 State of the Union address, ut he did not go nearly far enough.
H I S IS N O T A T E S T USCLES  nce lifetime employment is a form of fat that a flat world simply can ot sustain any longer, compassionate flatism seeks to focus its energy n how government and business can enhance every worker s lifetime employability.
Lifetime employability requires replacing that fat with muscle.
he social contract that progressives should try to enforce between gov rnment and workers, and companies and workers, is one in which gov rnment and companies say, "We cannot guarantee you any lifetime mployment.
But we can guarantee you that we will concentrate on giv ng you the tools to make yourself more lifetime employable more ble to acquire the knowledge or the experience needed to be a good dapter, synthesizer, collaborator etc."
In the flat world, the individual orker is going to become more and more responsible for managing his r her own career, risks, and economic security, and the role of govern ent and business is to help workers build all the muscles they need to o just that.
he "muscles" workers need most are portable benefits and opportu ities for lifelong learning.
Why those two?
Because they are the most mportant assets in making a worker mobile and adaptable.
As Harvard niversity economist Robert Lawrence notes, the greatest single asset hat the American economy has always had is the flexibility and mobility f its labor force and labor laws.
iven that reality, argues Lawrence, it becomes increasingly impor ant for society, to the extent possible, to make benefits and education  he two key ingredients of employabilityas flexible as possible.
You on't want people to feel that they have to stay with a company forever imply to keep their pension and health benefits.
The more the work orce feels mobile in terms of health care, pension benefits, and life ong learning possibilitiesthe more it will be willing and able to jump nto the new industries and new job niches spawned by the flat world and o move from dying companies to thriving companies.
reating legal and institutional frameworks for universal portability of ensions and health carein addition to Social Security, Medicare, and edicaidwill help people build up such muscles.
Today roughly 50  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ercent of Americans don't have a job-based pension plan, other than ocial Security.
Those who are fortunate enough to have one cannot eas ly take it with them from job to job.
What is needed is one simple uni ersal portable pension scheme, along the lines proposed by the rogressive Policy Institute, that would get rid of the confusing welter of ixteen different tax-deferred options now offered by the government and onsolidate them all into a single vehicle.
This universal plan, which you ould open with your first job, would encourage workers to establish 401 (k) ax-deferred savings programs.
Each worker and his or her employer ould make contributions of cash, bonuses, profit sharing, or stock, de ending on what sorts of benefits the specific employer offered.
These ssets would be allowed to build up tax-free in whatever savings or in estment portfolio options the worker chose.
But if and when it came ime to change jobs, the worker could take the whole portfolio with him r her and not have to either cash it out or leave it under the umbrella f the previous employer.
Rollover provisions do exist today, but they re complicated and many workers don't take advantage of them be ause of that.
he universal pension format would make rollover simple, easy, and xpected, so pension lockup per se would never keep someone from oving from one job to another.
Each employer could still offer his or er own specific 401(k) benefit plan, as an incentive to attract employ es.
But once a worker moved to another job, the investments in that par icular 401 (k) would just automatically dump into his or her universal ension account.
With each new job, a new 401 (k) could be started, and ith each move, the benefits deposited in that same universal pension ccount.
n addition to this simple, portable, and universal pension program, ill Marshall, president of the Progressive Policy Institute, proposes leg slation that would make it much easier and more likely for workers to btain stock options in the companies for which they work.
Such legis ation would give tax incentives to companies to give more workers more ptions earlier and penalize companies that do not.
Part of making work rs more mobile is creating more ways to make more workers owners of  H I S IS N O T A T E S T inancial assets, not just their own labor.
"We want a public that sees it elf as stakeholders, sharing in the capital-creating side of the flat world, ot just competing in global labor markets," argued Marshall.
"We all ave to be owners as well as wage earners.
That is where public policy as to be focusedto make sure that people have wealth-producing as ets as they enter the twenty-first century, the way homeownership ac omplished that in the twentieth century."
hy?
Because there is an increasing body of literature that says eople who are stakeholders, people who have a slice of the pie, "are ore deeply invested in our system of democratic capitalism and the olicies that keep it dynamic," said Marshall.
It is another way, besides omeownership, to underpin the legitimacy of democratic capitalism.
It s also another way to energize it, because workers who are also owners re more productive on the job.
Moreover, in a flat world where every orker is going to face suffer competition, the more opportunities veryone has to build wealth through the power of markets and com ounding interest, the more he or she will be able to be self-reliant.
We eed to give workers every stabilizer we can and make it as easy for them o get stock options as it is for the plutocrats.
Instead of just being focused n protecting those with existing capital, as conservatives so often seem o be, let's focus instead on widening the circle of capital owners.
n the health-care side, which I won't delve into in great detail, since hat would be a book unto itself, it is essential that we develop a scheme or portable health insurance that reduces some of the burden on em loyers for providing and managing coverage.
Virtually every entrepre eur I talked to for this book cited soaring and uncontrolled health-care osts in America as a reason to move factories abroad to countries where enefits were more limited, or nonexistent, or where there was national ealth insurance.
Again, I favor the type of portable health-care program roposed by PPI.
The idea is to set up state-by-state collective purchasing ools, the way Congress and federal employees now cover themselves.
hese pools would set the rules and create the marketplace in which in urance companies could offer a menu of options.
Each employer would hen be responsible for offering this menu of options to each new em-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T loyee.
Workers could choose high, medium, or low coverage.
Everyone, hough, would have to be covered.
Depending on the employer, it would over part or all of the premiums and the employee the rest.
But em loyers would not be responsible for negotiating plans with insurance ompanies, where they have little individual clout.
he state or federal pools would do that.
This way employees would be otally mobile and could take their health-care coverage wherever they ent.
This type of plan has worked like a charm for members of Congress, o why not offer it to the wider public?
Needy and low-income work rs who could not afford to join a plan would get some government subsidy o do so.
But the main idea is to establish a government-supervised, regulated, and -subsidized private insurance market in which government ets the broad rules so that there is no cherry-picking of healthy workers or rbitrary denial of treatment.
The health care itself is administered pri ately, and the job of employers is to facilitate their workers' entry into ne of these state pools and, ideally, help them pay for some or all of the remiums, but not be responsible for the health care themselves.
In the ransition, though, employers could continue to offer health-care plans as n incentive, and workers would have the option of going with either the lan offered by their employers or the menu of options available through he state purchasing pools.
(For details, go to ppionline.org.)
ne can quibble about the details of any of these proposals, but I think he basic inspiration behind them is exactiy right: In a flattening world, here worker security can no longer be guaranteed by Fortune 500 corpo ations with top-down pension and health plans, we need more collabora ive solutionsamong government, labor, and businessthat will promote elf-reliant workers but not just leave them to fend for themselves.
hen it comes to building muscles of lifetime employability, gov rnment has another critical role to play: upgrading the educational evel of the entire American workforce.
In Chapter 7, I discussed the ight kind of education for the jobs of the new middle.
But for people to e able to learn how to learn, to nurture their right brains, to be adapt ble, and to become synthesizers, they have to start by learning sound undamentals.
The right education can be built only on top of a sound ducation in the fundamentalsreading comprehension, writing, arith-  H I S IS N O T A T E S T etic, and basic science.
Without more Americans with this solid rounding, we can't possibly build a new middle of the size we need to eep our standard of living rising.
e've been here before.
Each century, as we push out the frontiers of uman knowledge, work at every level becomes more complex, requir ng more pattern recognition and problem solving.
Somehow we got hrough this transition from an agriculture-based society 150 years ago to n industrial-based oneand still ended up with a higher standard of liv ng for the vast majority of Americans.
How did we do it?
We began by aking high school mandatory.
We said everyone is going to have to have a secondary education," aid Stanford University economist Paul Romer.
"That was what the igh school movement in the early part of the twentieth century was all bout."
As economic historians have demonstrated in a variety of re earch (see particularly the work of Harvard economists Claudia Goldin nd Larry Katz), both technology and trade are making the pie bigger, ut they are also shifting the shares of that pie away from low-skilled la or to high-skilled labor.
As American society produced more higherskilled people by making high school mandatory, it empowered more eople to get a bigger slice of the bigger, more complex economic pie.
As hat century progressed, we added, on top of the high school movement, he GI Bill and the modern university system.
These were big ideas," noted Romer, "and what is missing at the mo ent is a political imagination of how do we do something just as big and ust as important for the transition into the twenty-first century as we did for he nineteenth and twentieth."
The obvious challenge, Romer added, is to ake tertiary education, if not compulsory, then government-subsidized or at least two years, whether it is at a state university, a community col ege, or a technical school.
Tertiary education is more critical the flatter the orld gets, because technology will be churning old jobs, and spawning ew, more complex ones, much faster than during the transition from the gricultural economy to the industrial one.
ducating more people at the tertiary level has two effects.
First, it roduces more people with the skills to claim higher-value-added work n the new niches that require more pattern recognition, synthesizing,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nd complex problem solving.
Second, it shrinks the pool of people look ng for lower-skilled work, from road maintenance to home repair to tarbucks baristas.
By shrinking the pool of lower-skilled workers, we elp to stabilize their wages (provided we also control low-skilled immi ration), because there are fewer people available to do those jobs.
It is ot an accident that plumbers can charge $75 an hour in major urban reas or that quality housekeepers or cooks are hard to find.
That's good.
e want them to be more in demand and to make a decent wage.
merica's ability from the mid-nineteenth century on into the midtwentieth century to train people, limit immigration, and make low-skilled ork scarce enough to win decent wages was the key to creating a middle lass without too disparate an income gap.
"Indeed," noted Romer, "from he end of the nineteenth century to the middle of the twentieth, we had a arrowing of the income gap.
Now we have seen an increase of that gap ver the last twenty or thirty years.
That is telling us that you have to run aster in order to stay in the same place."
With each advance in technology nd increase in the complexity of services, you need an even higher level f skills to do the new jobs.
Moving from being a farmhand to a phone op rator who spoke proper English and could be polite was one thing.
But oving from being a phone operator after the job got outsourced to India o being able to install or repair phone-mail systemsor write their soft arerequires a whole new leap upward.
hile expanding research universities on the high end of the spec rum is important, so is expanding the availability of technical schools nd community colleges.
Everyone should have a chance to be educated eyond high school.
Otherwise upper-income kids will get those skills nd their slice, and the lower-income kids will never get a chance.
We ave to increase the government subsidies that make it possible for more nd more kids to attend community colleges and more and more lowskilled workers to get retrained.
FK wanted to put a man on the moon.
My vision is to put every merican man or woman on a campus.
mployers have a critical contribution to make to their workers' life ime employability, and it starts by helping them become more adaptable  H I S IS N O T A T E S T hrough lifetime learning.
Take, for instance, CapitalOne, the global redit card company, which began outsourcing elements of its backroom perations to Wipro and Infosys in India over the past few years.
Com eting in the global financial services market, the company felt it had to ake advantage of all the cost-saving opportunities that its competitors ere using.
CapitalOne began, though, by trying to educate its employ es through workshops about the company's competitive predicament.
It ade clear that there is no safe haven where lifetime employment is pos ible anymoreinside CapitalOne or outside.
Then it developed a pro ram for the cross training of computer programmers, those most affected y outsourcing.
The company would take a programmer who specialized n mainframes and teach him or her to be a distributed systems program er as well.
CapitalOne did similar cross training on its business side, in verything from auto loans to risk management.
As a result, the workers ho were eventually let go in an outsourcing move were much better syn hesizers, much more versatile, and therefore in a much better position to et new jobs, because they were cross trained.
And those who were cross rained but retained by CapitalOne were more versatile and therefore ore valuable to CapitalOne, because they could do multiple tasks.
hat is why our whole society benefits when government provides sub idies or tax incentives to companies to offer as wide an array as possible f in-house learning opportunities.
The menu of Internet-based workertraining programs today is enormousfrom online degree programs to inhouse guided training for different specializations.
(And every week brings  technological breakthrough that makes this easier and richer.
For in tance, we have not even begun to tap the potential of putting the lectures f great teachers on video.
Why suffer through bad teachers when a great eacher is just a flat screen away?)
Not only is the menu enormous and rowing, but the cost to the company for offering these educational options s very low.
The more lifetime learning opportunities that companies pro ide, the more they are both widening the skill base of their own workforce nd fulfilling a moral obligation to workers whose jobs are outsourced to ee to it that they leave more employable than they came.
If there is a new ocial contract implicit between employers and employees today, it should  H E W O R L D IS F L A T e this: You give me your labor, and I will guarantee that as long as you work ere, I will give you every opportunitythrough either career advancement r trainingto become more employable, more versatile.
eorge Miller, a wise longtime Democratic congressman from the ast Bay district in San Francisco, who is deeply involved with public chools there, once remarked to me, "Education is a process, not a lace."
Education can and must go on everywhere all the timein chools, offices, at home, online, in the classroom, over your iPodwith onventional teachers, self-teaching methods, online games, whatever orks.
You cannot let up, because somewhere out there there's a com etitor who isn't letting up.
hile we need to redouble our efforts to build the muscles of each in ividual American, we have to continue to import muscles from abroad as ell to make up for what we cannot educate here.
Most of the Indian, hinese, Russian, Japanese, Korean, Iranian, Arab, and Israeli engineers, hysicists, and scientists who come to work or study in the United States ake great citizens.
They are family-oriented, educated, and hardworking, nd most would jump at the chance to become an American.
They are exacdy the type of people this country needs, and we cannot let the FBI, CIA, nd Homeland Security, in their zeal to keep out the next Mohammed tta, also keep out the next Sergey Brin, one of the cofounders of Google, ho was bom in Russia.
As a computer architect friend of mine says, "If a oreign-born person is one day going to take my job, I'd prefer they be merican citizens helping pay for my retirement benefits."
would favor an immigration policy that gives afive-yearwork visa to ny foreign student who completes a Ph.D. at an accredited American niversity in any subject.
I don't care if it is Greek mythology or mathe atics.
If we can cream off the first-round intellectual draft choices from round the world, it will always end up a net plus for America.
If the flat orld is about connecting all the knowledge pools together, we want our nowledge pool to be the biggest.
Said Bill Brody, the president of Johns opkins, "We are in a global talent search, so anything we can do in merica to get those top draft choices we should do, because one of hem is going to be Babe Ruth, and why should we let him or her go omewhere else?"
H I S IS N O T A T E S T OOD AT ushions Worth Keeping ile many of the old corporate and government safety nets will  V vanish under global competition in the flat world, some fat still eeds to be maintained, and even added.
As everyone who worries about is or her health knows, there is "good fat" and "bad fat"but everybody eeds some fat.
That is also true of every country in the flat world.
Social ecurity is good fat.
We need to keep it.
A welfare system that discourages eople from working is bad fat.
The sort of good fat that actually needs to e added for a flat world is wage insurance.
ccording to a study by Lori Kletzer, an economist at the University f California, Santa Cruz, in the 1980s and '90s, two-thirds of workers ho lost jobs in manufacturing industries hit by overseas competition arned less on their next job.
A quarter of workers who lost their jobs and ere reemployed saw their income fall 30 percent or more.
Losing a job or any reason is a traumafor the worker and his or her familybut articularly for older workers who are less able to adapt to new produc ion techniques or lack the education to move up into more skilled ser ice jobs.
his idea of wage insurance was first proposed in 1986 by Harvard's obert Lawrence and Robert E. Litan of the Brookings Institution, in a ook called Saving Free Trade.
The idea languished for a while until it tarted to catch fire again with an updated analysis by Kletzer and Litan in 001.
It got further political clout from the bipartisan U.S. Trade Deficit ommission in 2001.
This commission couldn't agree on anything ncluding the causes of or what to do about the trade deficitother than he wisdom of wage insurance.
Trade creates winners and losers, and what we were thinking about ere mechanisms by which the winners could compensate the losers, nd particularly losers who were enjoying high wages in a particular job nd suddenly found their new employment at much lower wages," said awrence.
The way to think about this, he explained, is that every worker as "general skills and specific skills" for which he or she is paid, and hen you switch jobs you quickly discover which is which.
So you might  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ave a college and CPA degree, or you might have a high school degree nd the ability to operate a lathe.
Both skills were reflected in your wages.
ut suppose one day your lathe job gets moved to China or your basic ac ounting work is outsourced to India and you have to go out and find a ew job.
Your new employer will not likely compensate you much for our specific skills, because your knowledge as a machine tool operator r a general accountant is probably of less use to him or her.
You will be aid largely for your general skills, your high school education or college egree.
Wage insurance would compensate you for your old specific kills, for a set period of time, while you take a new job and learn new pecific skills.
he standard state-run unemployment insurance program eases ome of this pain for workers, but it does not address their bigger con erns of declining wages in a new job and the inability to pay for health nsurance while they are unemployed and searching.
To qualify for wage nsurance, workers seeking compensation for job loss would have to eet three criteria.
First, they would have to have lost their job through ome form of displacementoffshoring, outsourcing, downsizing, or actory closure.
Second, they would have to have held the job for at least wo years.
And third, the wage insurance would not be paid until the orkers found new jobs, which would provide a strong incentive to look or work quickly and increase the chances that they would get on-the-job etraining.
On-the-job training is always the best way to learn new kills instead of having to sign up for some general government train ng program, with no promise of a job at the other end, and go through hat while remaining unemployed.
orkers who met those three conditions would then receive pay ents for two years, covering half the drop in their income from their revious job (capped at $10,000 a year).
Kletzer and Litan also proposed hat the government pay half the health insurance premiums for all "dis laced" workers for up to six months.
Wage insurance seems to me a uch better idea than relying only on the traditional unemployment in urance offered by states, which usually covers only about 50 percent of ost workers' previous wages, is limited to six months, and does not help orkers who suffer a loss of earnings after they take a new job.
H I S IS N O T A T E S T oreover, as Kletzer and Litan noted, although all laid-off workers ow have the right to purchase unsubsidized health insurance from their ormer employer if health coverage was offered when they were em loyed, many jobless workers do not have the money to take advantage f this guarantee.
Also, while unemployed workers can earn an addi ional fifty-two weeks of unemployment insurance if they enroll in an ap roved retraining program, workers have no guarantee that when they inish such a program they will have a job.
or all these reasons, the Kletzer-Litan proposal makes a lot of sense o me as the right benefit for cushioning workers in a flat world.
More ver, such a program would be eminently affordable.
Litan estimated that t an unemployment rate of 5 percent, the wage insurance and health are subsidy today would cost around $8 billion a year, which is peanuts ompared to the positive impact it could have on workers.
This program ould not replace classic state-run unemployment insurance for workers ho opt for that, but if it worked as projected, it could actually reduce the ost of such programs by moving people back to work quicker.
ome might ask, Why be compassionate at all?
Why keep any fat, fric ion, or barriers?
Let me put it as bluntly as I can: If you are not a compas ionate flatistif you are just a let er rip free-market flatistyou are not nly cruel, you are a fool.
You are courting a political backlash by those ho can and will get churned up by this flattening process, and that back ash could become ferocious if we hit any kind of prolonged recession.
he transition to a flat world is going to stress many people.
As Joshua .
Levine, E^Trade's chief technology officer, put it to me, "You know ow sometimes you go through a harrowing experience and you need a espite, but the respite never seems to come.
Look at the airline workers.
hey go through this [terrible] event like 9/11, and management and the irline unions all negotiate for four months and management says, 'If the nions don't cut $2 billion in salary and benefits they will have to shut he airline down.'
And after these wrenching negotiations the unions gree.
I just have to laugh, because you know that in a few months man gement is going to come right back .
There is no end.
No one has to sk me to cut my budget each year.
We all just know that each year we ill be expected to do more with less.
If you are a revenue producer, you  H E W O R L D IS F L A T re expected to come up with more revenue every year, and if you are an xpense saver, you are expected to come up with more savings every year.
ou never get a break from it."
f societies are unable to manage the strains that are produced by this lattening, there will be a backlash, and political forces will attempt to einsert some of the frictions and protectionist barriers that the flattening orces have eliminated, but they will do it in a crude way that will, in the ame of protecting the weak, end up lowering everyone's standard of liv ng.
Former Mexican president Ernesto Zedillo is very sensitive to this roblem, having had to manage Mexico's transition into NAFTA, with all f the strains that put on Mexican society.
Speaking of the flattening rocess, he said to me, "It would be very hard to stop, but it can be stopped or a time.
Maybe you can't stop it totally, but you can slow it down.
And t makes a difference whether you get there in twenty-five years or fifty ears.
In between, two or three generationswho could have benefited a ot from more trade and globalizationwill end up with crumbs."
lways remember, said Zedillo, that behind all this technology is a olitical infrastructure that enables it to play out.
"There have been a se ies of concrete political decisions, taken over the last fifty years, that put he world where it is right now," he said.
"Therefore, there are political ecisions that could screw up the whole process too."
s the saying goes: If you want to live like a Republican, vote like a emocrattake good care of the losers and left-behinds.
The only way o be a flatist is to be a compassionate flatist.
ARENTING   discussion of compassionate flatism would be complete without lso discussing the need for improved parenting.
Helping individu ls adapt to a flat world is not only the job of governments and compa ies.
It is also the job of parents.
They too need to know in what world heir kids are growing up and what it will take for them to thrive.
In short, e need a new generation of parents ready to administer tough love:  H I S IS N O T A T E S T here comes a time when youVe got to put away the Game Boys, turn ff the television, shut off the iPod, and get your kids down to work.
he sense of entitlement, the sense that because we once dominated lobal commerce and geopoliticsand Olympic basketballwe always ill, the sense that delayed gratification is a punishment worse than a panking, the sense that our kids have to be swaddled in cotton wool so hat nothing bad or disappointing or stressful ever happens to them at chool is, quite simply, a growing cancer on American society.
And if we on't start to reverse it, our kids are going to be in for a huge and socially isruptive shock from the flat world.
While a different approach by politi ians is necessary, it is not sufficient.
hortly after this book first came out my wife (a schoolteacher) ointed out to me a letter to the editor in The New York Times (Sep ember 1, 2005) in response to a column on faltering American educa ion by my colleague Bob Herbert.
The letter summed up my feelings xactly: "To the Editor: Regarding the state of education in the United tates, Bob Herbert writes, 'I respectfully suggest that we may be looking t a crisis h e r e ' .
As a highly qualified teacher of English at the high chool level, I agree.
But this crisis we see in our schools has its roots in merican homes increasingly devoid of books and printed material, here children turn exclusively to television, computers and electronic ames for entertainmentand see the adults around them doing the ame.
Instant-gratification technology has, for many students, replaced he taskand the thrillof reading.
One cannot develop solid writing kills without first being a decent reader; underdevelopment of these kills translates to low scores in standardized testing across racial and eco omic lines, and in all subject areas.
Education begins in a home where eading is intrinsically valuable and necessary; where recognition of the ard work associated with education and doing well in school are top pri rities; and where parents join schools in having high expectations for heir children's success.
Without this initial foundation and continued upport at home, a teacher's hands are tied at school.
Jo Ann Price, reehold, N.J." avid Baltimore, the Nobel Prize-winning president of Caltech, nows what it takes to get your child ready to compete against the cream  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f the global crop.
He told me that he is struck by the fact that almost all he students who make it to Caltech, one of the best scientific universities n the world, come from public schools, not from private schools that ometimes nurture a sense that just because you are there, you are special nd entitied.
"I look at the kids who come to Caltech, and they grew up n families that encouraged them to work hard and to put off a little bit of ratification for the future and to understand that they need to hone their kills to play an important role in the world," Baltimore said.
"I give par nts enormous credit for this, because these kids are all coming from pub ic schools that people are calling failures.
Public education is producing hese remarkable studentsso it can be done.
Their parents have nur ured them to make sure that they realize their potential.
I think we need  revolution in this country when it comes to parenting around education."
oreign-born parents, particularly from Asia and Eastern Europe, of en seem to do this better.
"About one-third of our students have an Asian ackground or are recent immigrants," said Baltimore.
A significant ma ority of the students coming to Caltech in the engineering disciplines re foreign-born, and a large fraction of its current faculty is foreign-born.
In biology, at the postdoc level, the dominance of Chinese students is verwhelming," he added.
No wonder that at the big scientific confer nces today, a majority of the research papers dealing with cutting-edge ioscience have at least one Chinese name on them.
By the way, nearly 0 percent of the kids who go to MIT, a school just like Caltech, also ome from two-parent homes, where both parents can help guide a child own the straight and narrow.
n July 2004, comedian Bill Cosby used an appearance at Jesse ackson's Rainbow/PUSH Coalition & Citizenship Education Fund's an ual conference to upbraid African Americans for not teaching their chil ren proper grammar and for black kids not striving to learn more hemselves.
Cosby had already declared, "Everybody knows it's important o speak English except these knuckleheads.
You can't be a doctor with hat kind of crap coming out of your mouth."
Referring to African mericans who squandered their chances for a better life, Cosby told the ainbow Coalition, "You've got to stop beating up your women because ou can't find a job, because you didn't want to get an education and now  H I S IS N O T A T E S T ou're [earning] minimum wage.
You should have thought more of your elf when you were in high school, when you had an opportunity."
When osby's remarks attracted a lot of criticism, Reverend Jackson defended im, arguing, "Bill is saying, let's fight the right fight.
Let's level the play ng field.
Drunk people can't do that.
Illiterate people can't do that."
hat is right.
Americans are the ones who increasingly need to level the laying fieldnot by pulling others down, not by feeling sorry for our elves, but by lifting ourselves up.
But when it comes to how to do that, osby was saying something that is important for black and white Ameri ans, rich and poor.
Education, whether it comes from parents or schools, as to be about more than just cognitive skills.
It also has to include char cter building.
The fact is, parents and schools and cultures can and do hape people.
The most important influence in my life, outside of my fam ly, was my high school journalism teacher, Hattie M. Steinberg.
She ounded the fundamentals of journalism into her studentsnot simply ow to write a lead or accurately transcribe a quote but, more important, ow to comport yourself in a professional way.
She was nearing sixty at he time I had her as my teacher and high school newspaper adviser in he late 1960s.
She was the polar opposite of "cool," but we hung around er classroom like it was the malt shop and she was Wolfman Jack.
None f us could have articulated it then, but it was because we enjoyed being arangued by her, disciplined by her, and taught by her.
She was a oman of clarity and principles in an age of uncertainty.
I sit up straight ust thinking about her!
Our children will increasingly be competing ead-to-head with Chinese, Indian, and Asian kids, whose parents have  lot more of Hattie's character-building approach than their own merican parents.
I am not suggesting that we militarize education, but  am suggesting that we do more to push our young people to go beyond heir comfort zones, to do things right, and to be ready to suffer some hort-run pain for longer gain.
nfortunately, it has been too long since America had a leader ready nd willing to call on our nation to do something hardto give some hing up, not just to get something more, and to sacrifice for a great na ional cause in the future, rather than live for today.
But maybe we also ave the leaders we deservea perfect reflection of who we are and how  H E W O R L D IS F L A T e raise our own children.
Paul A. Samuelson, the Nobel Prize-winning conomist from MIT whose textbooks have shaped economics students round the world for nearly five decades, gave a rare interview with the erman weekly Der Spiegel, for a special issue titled Globalization: The ew World (December 2005).
Asked what he saw as the future of he American economy, Samuelson answered, "We may still be the lead yclist breaking the wind for the riders behind us, but the others are clos ng in.
America's status as a leading nation is growing increasingly tenu us because we have become such a low-savings society.
We are a society f me, me, me, and nownot thinking about others and tomorrow.
I uppose the problem is the electorate, not its leaders...
In the past, right kids who later became mathematicians were doing challenging uzzles.
Today they watch TV.
There are too many distractions, which is nother reason why we have this attitude of me, me, me, and now."
f this is a test, and I think it is, our leaders and our parents have not one as good a job as they could to prepare our young people for the world head.
"We are like a glass beaker that is filled three-quarters of the way to he top, and the liquid is our wealth," said Steve Jobs, the founder of Apple omputer and one of America's greatest innovators.
"There is this much igger beaker next to it, but it is filled to a much lower level.
What we are oing today is we're connecting a hose between these two beakers, which ave never been connected before."
As a result, he said, our standard of liv ng is almost certain to go down unless we can continue to be "incredibly nnovative."
ut, added Jobs, "I am afraid we are getting close to it being too late.
ecause you can't change the school system in the short term, we might e just beginning to pay the price for the neglect of the last twenty years."
obs noted that his company recently decided to build a major plant in hina, and he was amazed at how quickly the Chinese government ade the decision to locate the factory, provide capital to subsidize its uilding, and help assemble a workforce.
"Boom, it was done just like hat," he said.
"Fifteen years ago, ten years ago, that would have hap ened in Texas or somewhere else [in America].
Now it is happening in hina.
So the liquid is already flowing from one beaker to the other.
And t will flow even more when they start designing the products.
I am an  H I S IS N O T A T E S T ptimist [about America's future], but if we are sitting around watching ome burn, it's hard to be an optimist."
teve Jobs's rallying call is a good place to end this chapter, a chapter hat began with President Kennedy rallying the country to rise to the hallenge of putting a man on the moon.
Because, in some way, they ere both engaged in the same endeavorcalling on Americans to do hat they do best, which is invent the future.
n October 24, 2005, Time magazine ran a cover story about Apple's atest invention.
The cover showed Jobs holding up the newest Apple Pod, the one that plays videos as well as music.
And the headline said, The Man Who Always Seems to Know .
That is he only way America is going to thrive in a flat world if we keep in enting the next new thing.
My friend Jerry Rao, the Indian entrepre eur who founded MphasiS, made an offhand comment to me one day hat still rings in my ear.
For India and China the future is very clear, he aid.
They know exactly what they are going to do in the future.
"We are oing to do in the future what Americans are doing today," he said.
"Your ob is to invent the future."
That is so rightAmerica's job is not to fight ith India and China over the old middle but to invent the new middle, nd more.
"That is always hard," added Jerry, "because you don't know hat the future looks like," and because it always takes a leap of faith to elieve that you will always be able to invent that next new thing.
ut that is our missionand our best hope.
That is what President ennedy understood.
It is what Steve Jobs, Marc Andreessen, Shirley Ann ackson, Michael Dell, Craig Barrett, and Bill Gates understand.
The nly way we are going to keep our standard of living rising is to build a so iety that produces people who can keep inventing the future.
But as nowledge hurtles forward, inventing the future becomes a harder and arder taskone that takes more of the right education, the right infra tructure, the right ambition, the right leadership, the right parenting.
We eed to get our whole country focused around meeting this challenge.
he future won't wait for us, and if we don't invent it, someone else ill. Because, as Jerry Rao will also tell you, India and China will be do ng tomorrow what America does today, but, thanks to the flat-world plat orm, the day after tomorrow, India, China, and many others will also be  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nventing the future.
As I have tried to stress, Globalization 3.0, which rought us to this flattening world, is not just Globalization 2.0 intensi ied.
It is a whole different model.
It is not just about the ability of devel ped countries to tap into more markets or access more cheap labor.
It is  difference in degree so greatthe degree of low-cost interconnectivity, he degree of individual empowerment, the degree of global networks for ollaborationthat it is a difference in kind.
It changes everything about ho can compete and how they compete.
An essay in the November 005 Mercer Management Journal, "Are You Enjoying Globalization et?"
summed up those differences well, noting that the flat world gives ore people in more places the ability to pull together low-cost labor nd high-power technology.
We have never seen that combination eforeand it alone is already a challenge to developed countries.
But he Indias and Chinas are increasingly adding one more thing to low-cost abor and high-power technology: unfettered imaginationthat is, high nnovative and creative capacities.
They will focus first on solving their wn problems with cheap labor, high technology, and high creativity e-imagining their own futures.
Then they will focus on ours.
We must ave people, lots of people, who can do the same.
So, for the last time, ou have been warned.
This is not a test.
eveloping ountries nd the Flat World EN he Virgin of Guadalupe t's not that we are becoming more Anglo-Saxon.
It's that we are having an en ounter with reality.
Frank Schirrmacher, publisher of the German newspaper Frankfurter llgemeine eitung, commenting to The New York Times about the need or German workers to retool and work longer hours eek knowledge even unto China.
saying of the Prophet Muhammad e more I worked on this book, the more I found myself asking eople I met around the world where they were when they first iscovered that the world was flat.
n the space of two weeks, I got two revealing answers, one from exico, one from Egypt.
I was in Mexico City in the spring of 2004, and  put the question on the table during lunch with a few Mexican jour alist colleagues.
One of them said he realized that he was living in a ew world when he started seeing reports appearing in the Mexican me ia and on the Internet that some statuettes of Mexico's patron saint, the irgin of Guadalupe, were being imported into Mexico from China, robably via ports in California.
When you are Mexico and your claim o fame is that you are a low-wage manufacturing country, and some of our people are importing statuettes of your own patron saint from  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hina, because China can make them and ship them all the way across he Pacific more cheaply than you can produce them, you are living in a lat world.
ouVe also got a problem.
Over at the Central Bank of Mexico, I sked its governor, Guillermo Ortiz, whether he was aware of this issue.
e rolled his eyes and told me that for some time now just by staring at he numbers on his computer screen he could feel the competitive play ng field being leveledand see that Mexico was losing some of its nat ral geographic advantages with the U.S. market.
"We started looking at he numbers in 2001  it was the first year in two decades that [Mexico's] xports to the U.S. declined," said Ortiz.
"That was a real shock.
We tarted reducing our gains in market share and then started losing them.
e said that there is a real change here .
And it was about China."
hina is such a powerhouse of low-cost manufacturing that even hough the NAFTA accord has given Mexico a leg up with the United tates, and even though Mexico is right next door to us, China in 2003 eplaced Mexico as the number two exporter to the United States.
Canada remains number one.)
Though Mexico still has a strong posi ion in big-ticket exports that are costly to ship, such as cars, auto parts, nd refrigerators, China is coming on strong and has already displaced exico in areas such as computer parts, electrical components, toys, tex iles, sporting goods, and tennis shoes.
But what's even worse for Mexico s that China is displacing some Mexican companies in Mexico, where hinese-made clothing and toys are now showing up on store shelves verywhere.
No wonder a Mexican journalist told me about the day he nterviewed a Chinese central bank official, who told him something bout China's relationship with America that really rattled him: "First we ere afraid of the wolf, then we wanted to dance with the wolf, and now e want to be the wolf."
few days after returning from Mexico, I had breakfast in Wash ngton with a friend from Egypt, Lamees El-Hadidy, a longtime business eporter in Cairo.
Naturally I asked her where she was when she discov red the world was flat.
She answered that it was just a few weeks earlier, uring the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.
She had done a story for NBC Arabiya Television about the colorful lanterns called fawanis, HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE ach with a burning candle inside, that Egyptian schoolchildren tradi ionally carried around during Ramadan, a tradition dating back cen uries to the Fatimid period in Egypt.
Kids swing the lanterns and sing ongs, and people give them candy or gifts, as in America on Halloween.
or centuries, small, low-wage workshops in Cairo's older neighbor oods have manufactured these lanterns until the last few years.
hat was when plastic Chinese-made Ramadan lanterns, each with a attery-powered light instead of a candle, began flooding the market, rippling the traditional Egyptian workshops.
Said Lamees, "They are in ading our tradition in an innovative wayand we are doing nothing bout it.
These lanterns come out of our tradition, our soul, but [the hinese versions] are more creative and advanced than the Egyptian nes."
Lamees said that when she asked Egyptians, "Do you know where hese are made?"
they would all answer no.
Then they would turn the amps over and see that they came from China.
any mothers, like Lamees, though, appreciated the fact that the hinese versions are safer than the traditional Egyptian ones, which are ade with sharp metal edges and glass, and usually still use candles.
The hinese versions are made of plastic and feature flashing lights and have n embedded microchip that plays traditional Egyptian Ramadan tunes nd even the theme song to the popular Ramadan T V cartoon series akkar.
As Business Monthly, published by the American Chamber of ommerce in Egypt, reported in its December 2001 issue, Chinese im orters "are pitted not only against each other, but also against the severalhundred-year-old Egyptian industry.
But the Chinese models are destined o prevail, according to [a] famous importer, Taha Zayat.
Imports have efinitely cut down on sales of traditional fawanis,' he said.
'Of all fawanis on the market, I don't think that more than 5 percent are now made n Egypt.'
People with ties to the Egyptian [fawanis] industry believe hina has a clear advantage over Egypt.
With its superior technology, hey said, China can make mass quantities, which helps to keep prices elatively low.
Egypt's traditional [fawanis] industry, by contrast, is char cterized by a series of workshops specialized in different stages of the pro uction process.
Glassmakers, painters, welders and metal craftsmen all ave their role to play.
'There will always be fawanis in Ramadan, but in  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he future I think Egyptian-made ones could become extinct/ Zayat said.
There is no way they can ever compete with things made in China.'"
hink how crazy that statement is: Egypt has masses of low-wage orkers, like China.
It sits right next to Europe, on the Suez Canal.
It ould be and should be the Taiwan of the eastern Mediterranean, but in tead it is throwing in the towel to atheistic China on the manufacture of ne of Muslim Egypt's most cherished cultural artifacts.
Ibrahim El sway, one of the main importers from China of fawanis, gave Business onthly a tour of his warehouse in the Egyptian town of Muski: He had mported sixteen different models of Ramadan lanterns from China in 004.
"Amid the crowds at Muski, [El Esway] gestured to one of his em loyees, who promptly opened a dust-covered box and pulled out a plas ic fawanis shaped like the head of Simba, from The Lion King.
This is he first model we imported back in 1994,' he said.
He switched it on.
As he blue-colored lion's head lit up, the song 'It's a Small World' rang out."
NTROSPECTION  e previous section of this book looked at how individuals, particu arly Americans, should think about meeting the challenge posed by he flattening of the world.
This chapter focuses on what sort of policies eveloping countries need to undertake in order to create the right envi onment for their companies and entrepreneurs to thrive in a flat world, lthough many of the things I am about to say apply to many developed ountries as well.
hen developing countries start thinking about the challenge of latism, thefirstthing they need to do is engage in some brutally honest in rospection.
A country, its people and leaders alike, has to be honest with tself and look clearly at exactly where it stands in relation to other coun ries and in relation to the ten flatteners.
It has to ask itself, "To what extent s my country advancing or being left behind by the flattening of the world, nd to what extent is it adapting to and taking advantage of all the new plat- HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE orms for collaboration and competition?"
As that Chinese banking official oasted to my Mexican colleague, China is the wolf.
Of all the ten flatten d, the entry of China into the world market is the most important for de eloping countries, and for many developed countries.
China can do igh-quality low-cost manufacturing better than any other country, and in reasingly, it also can do high-quality higher-cost manufacturing.
With hina and the other nine flatteners coming on so strong, no country today an afford to be anything less than brutally honest with itself.
o that end, I believe that what the world needs today is a club that ould be modeled after Alcoholics Anonymous (A.A.).
It would be alled Developing Countries Anonymous (D.C.A.).
And just as at the irst AA.
meeting you attend you have to stand up and say, "My name is homas Friedman and I'm an alcoholic," so at Developing Countries nonymous, countries would have to stand up at their first meeting and ay, "My name is Syria and I'm underdeveloped."
Or "My name is rgentina and I'm underachieving.
I have not lived up to my potential."
very country needs "the ability to make [its] own introspection," ince "no country develops without going through an X-ray of where you re and where your limits are," said Luis de la Calle, one of Mexico's hief NAFTA crafters and negotiators.
Countries that fall off the devel pment wagon are a bit like drunks; to get back on they have to learn to ee themselves as they really are.
Development is a voluntary process.
ou need a positive decision to make the right steps, but it starts with in rospectionlooking brutally honestly at your strengths and your weak esses, and exactly what both will mean in a flattening world.
When you and I were born," de la Calle said to me, "our competition was] our next-door neighbors.
Today our competition is a Japanese or a renchman or a Chinese.
You know where you rank very quickly in a flat orld .
You are now competing with everyone else."
The best talent in  flat world will earn more, he added, "and if you don't measure up, some ne will replace youand it will not be the guy across the street."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T  CAN  E T IT FOR YOU HOLESALE   I have tried to argue throughout this book, a country's decision to evelop when the world becomes flat is really a decision to focus on etting four basic things right.
The first is the right infrastructure to con ect more of your people with the flat-world platformfrom cheap nternet bandwidth and mobile phones to modern airports and roads.
he second is the right educational system to get more of your people in ovating and collaborating on the flat-world platform.
The third is the ight governance from fiscal policy to the rule of law to the quality of he bureaucracyto manage the flow between your people and the flatworld platform in the most productive way possible.
This point is often ost.
With all the discussion about the economics of globalization, peo le lose sight of the fact that globalization is also a competition between ne country's public sector and another's.
That is, you need a quality bu eaucracy to channel, govern, and enhance the creative energies of a ountry so your people, as individuals, can not only imagine new prod cts and services but also bring them to life and take them to the mar etplace.
Fourth, you need the right environment.
You can get along as  country for a number of years while despoiling your environment.
But t the end of the day, countries that preserve their green spaces are much ore likely to preserve and attract the knowledge workerswho are mo ile, have choices, and can make the decisive difference in turning a de eloping economy into a developed one.
uring the late 1970s, but particularly after the fall of the Berlin Wall, s the world really started to flatten out, a lot of countries began trying to eform themselves accordingly.
They focused on improving education nd infrastructure and, in particular, adopting better governance.
But ost of the focus in the area of governance was really about adopting ore market-friendly macroeconomic policies.
I call this "reform whole ale."
The era of Globalization 2.0, when the world shrank from a size edium to a size small, was the era of reform wholesale, an era of broad acroeconomic reform.
These wholesale reforms were initiated by a mall handful of leaders in countries such as China, Russia, Mexico, HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE razil, and India.
These small groups of reformers often relied on the everage of authoritarian political systems to unleash the state-smothered arket forces in their societies.
They pushed their countries into more xport-oriented, free-market strategiesbased on privatization of state ompanies, deregulation of financial markets, currency adjustments, for ign direct investment, shrinking subsidies, lowering of protectionist tariff arriers, and introduction of more flexible labor lawsfrom the top down ithout ever really asking the people.
Ernesto Zedillo, who served as pres dent of Mexico from 1994 to 2000 and was minister of planning and bud et before that, once remarked to me that all the decisions to open the exican economy were taken by three people.
How many people do you uppose Deng Xiaoping consulted before he declared, "To get rich is glo ious," and uncorked the Chinese economy, or when he dismissed those ho questioned China s move from communism to free markets by saying hat what mattered was jobs and incomes, not ideology?
Deng tossed over ecades of Communist ideology with one sentence: "Black cat, white at, all that matters is that it catches mice."
In 1991, when India's finance inister, Manmohan Singh, took the first tentative steps to open India's conomy to more foreign trade, investment, and competition, it was a re ult not of some considered national debate and dialogue, but of the fact hat India's economy at that moment was so sclerotic, so unappealing to oreign investors, that it had almost run out of foreign currency.
When ikhail Gorbachev started dabbling with perestroika, it was with his back p against the Kremlin wall and with few allies in the Soviet leadership.
he same was true of Margaret Thatcher when she took on the striking oal miners' union in 1984 and forced reform wholesale onto the sagging ritish economy.
hat all these leaders confronted was the irrefutable fact that more pen and competitive markets are the only sustainable vehicle for grow ng a nation out of poverty, because they are the only guarantee that new deas, technologies, and best practices will easily flow into your country nd that private enterprises, and even government, will have the com etitive incentive and flexibility to adopt those new ideas and turn them nto jobs and products.
This is why the nonglobalizing countries, those  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hat refused to do any reform wholesale North Korea, for instance  ctually saw their per capita GDP growth shrink in the 1990s, while ountries that moved from a more socialist model to a globalizing model aw their per capita GDP grow in the 1990s.
As David Dollar and Art ray conclude in their book Trade, Growth, and Poverty, economic rowth and trade remain the best antipoverty program in the world.
he World Bank reported that in 1990 there were roughly 375 million eople in China living in extreme poverty, on less than $1 per day.
By 2001, here were 212 million Chinese living in extreme poverty, and by 2015, if urrent trends hold, there will be only 16 million living on less than $1 a ay.
In South Asiaprimarily India, Pakistan, and Bangladeshthe num ers go from 462 million in 1990 living on less than $1 a day down to 31 million by 2001 and down to 216 million in 2015.
In sub-Saharan frica, by contrast, where globalization has been slow to take hold, there ere 227 million people living on less than $1 a day in 1990, 313 million n 2001, and an expected 340 million by 2015. he problem for any globalizing country lies in thinking that it can top with reform wholesale.
In the 1990s, some countries thought that if hey got their ten commandments of economic reform wholesale right hou shall privatize state-owned industries, thou shall deregulate utilities, hou shall lower tariffs and encourage export industries, etc.they had a uccessful development strategy.
But as the world started to get smaller nd flatterenabling China to compete everywhere with everyone on a road range of manufactured products, enabling India to export its rainpower everywhere, enabling corporations to outsource any task any here, and enabling individuals to compete globally as never before  eform wholesale, confined largely to macroeconomics, was no longer ufficient to keep countries on a sustainable growth path.
A deeper rocess of reform was requiredone that would transform education, in rastructure, and governance in a much more profound manner.
HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE  CAN ONLY G E T IT FOR YOU ETAIL at if regions of the world were like the neighborhoods of a city?
V What would the world look like?
I'd describe it like this: Western urope would be an assisted-living facility, with an aging population lav shly attended to by Turkish nurses.
The United States would be a gated ommunity, with a metal detector at the front gate and a lot of people sit ing in their front yards complaining about how lazy everyone else was, ven though out back there was a small opening in the fence for exican labor and other energetic immigrants who helped to make the ated community function.
Latin America would be the fun part of own, the club district, where the workday doesn't begin until ten p.m. nd everyone sleeps until midmorning.
It's definitely the place to hang ut, but in between the clubs, you don't see a lot of new businesses open ng up, except on the street where the Chileans live.
The landlords in his neighborhood almost never reinvest their profits here, but keep them n a bank across town.
The Arab street would be a dark alley where out iders fear to tread, except for a few side streets called Dubai, Jordan, ahrain, Qatar, and Morocco.
The only new businesses are gas stations, hose owners, like the elites in the Latin neighborhood, rarely reinvest heir funds in the neighborhood.
Many people on the Arab street have heir curtains closed, their shutters drawn, and signs on their front lawn hat say, "No Trespassing.
Beware of Dog."
India, China, and East Asia ould be "the other side of the tracks."
Their neighborhood is a big eeming market, made up of small shops and one-room factories, inter persed with Stanley Kaplan SAT prep schools and engineering colleges.
obody ever sleeps in this neighborhood, everyone lives in extended amilies, and everyone is working and saving to get to "the right side of he tracks."
On the Chinese streets, there's no rule of law, but the roads re all well paved; there are no potholes, and the streetlights all work.
On he Indian streets, by contrast, no one ever repairs the streetlights, the oads are full of ruts, but the police are sticklers for the rules.
You need a icense to open a lemonade stand on the Indian streets.
Luckily, the lo al cops can be bribed, and the successful entrepreneurs all have their wn generators to run their factories and the latest cell phones to get  H E W O R L D IS F L A T round the fact that the local telephone poles are all down.
Africa, sadly, s that part of town where the businesses are boarded up, life expectancy s declining, and the only new buildings are health-care clinics.
y point here is that every region of the world has its strengths and eaknesses, and all are in need of reform retail to some degree.
What is re orm retail?
In the simplest terms, it is more than just opening your country o more foreign trade and investment and making a few macroeconomic olicy changes from the top.
Reform retail presumes you have already done eform wholesale.
It involves looking at infrastructure, education, and gov rnance and upgrading each one, so more of your people have the tools and egal framework to innovate and collaborate at the highest levels.
any of the key elements of reform retail were best defined by the re earch done by the World Banks International Finance Corporation IFC) and its economic analysis team led by its chief economist, Michael lein.
What do we learn from their work?
To begin with, you don't grow our country out of poverty by guaranteeing everyone a job.
Egypt guar ntees all college graduates a job each year, and it has been mired in overty with a slow-growing economy for fifty years.
If it were just a matter of the number of jobs, solutions would be asy," note Klein and Bita Hadjimichael in their World Bank Study, The rivate Sector in Development.
"For example, state-owned enterprises ould absorb all those in need of employment.
The real issue is not just mployment, but increasingly productive employment that allows living tandards to rise."
State-owned enterprises and state-subsidized private irms usually have not delivered sustainable productivity growth, and either have a lot of other approaches that people assume are elixirs of rowth, they add.
Just attracting more foreign investment into a country lso doesn't automatically do it.
And even massive investments in educa ion won't guarantee it.
Productivity growth and, hence, the way out of poverty, is not simply a atter of throwing resources at the problem," say Klein and Hadjimichael.
More important, it is a matter of using resources well."
In other words, ountries grow out of poverty not only when they manage their fiscal and onetary policies responsibly from above, i.e., reform wholesale.
In re ent years, a lot of attention and moral concern has been devoted to the HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE roblem of persistent poverty, particularly in Africa.
That is a good thing.
ut persistent poverty is a practical problem as well as a moral one, and e do ourselves no good to focus on our moral failings and not the prac ical shortcomings of the countries and governments involved.
Poor eople grow out of poverty when their governments create an environ ent in which educated workers and capitalists have the physical and le al infrastructure that makes it easy to start businesses, raise capital, and ecome entrepreneurs, and when they subject their people to at least ome competition from beyondbecause companies and countries with ompetitors always innovate more, better, and faster.
he IFC drove home this point with a comprehensive study of more han 130 countries, called Doing Business in 2004.
The IFC asked five basic uestions about doing business in each of these countries, questions about ow easy or difficult it is to (1) start a business in terms of local rules, regula ions, and license fees, (2) hire andfireworkers, (3) enforce a contract, (4) get redit, and (5) close a business that goes bankrupt or is failing.
To translate it nto my own lexicon, those countries that make all these things relatively imple and friction-free have undertaken reform retail, and those that have ot are stalled in reform wholesale and are not likely to thrive in a flat world.
he IFC's criteria were inspired by the brilliant and innovative work of ernando de Soto, who has demonstrated in Peru and other developing na ions that if you change the regulatory and business environment for the oor, and give them the tools to collaborate, they will do the rest.
oing Business in 2004 tries to explain each of its points with a few olorful examples: euku, an entrepreneur in Jakarta, wants to open a textile factory.
e has customers lined up, imported machinery, and a promising usiness plan.
Teuku s first encounter with the government is hen registering his business.
He gets the standard forms from he Ministry of Justice, and completes and notarizes them.
Teuku roves that he is a local resident and does not have a criminal ecord.
He obtains a tax number, applies for a business license, nd deposits the minimum capital (three times national income er capita) in the bank.
He then publishes the articles of associa-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ion in the official gazette, pays a stamp fee, registers at the inistry of Justice, and waits 90 days before filing for social secu ity.
One hundred sixty-eight days after he commences the pro ess, Teuku can legally start operations.
In the meantime, his ustomers have contracted with another business.
n Panama, another entrepreneur, Ina, registers her construc ion company in only 19 days.
Business is booming and Ina wants o hire someone for a two-year appointment.
But the employment aw only allows fixed-term appointments for specific tasks, and ven then requires a maximum term of one year.
At the same ime, one of her current workers often leaves early, with no ex use, and makes costly mistakes.
To replace him, Ina needs to no ify and get approval from the union, and pay five months' everance pay.
Ina rejects the more qualified applicant she would ike to hire and keeps the underperforming worker on staff.
li, a trader in the United Arab Emirates, can hire and fire ith ease.
But one of his customers refuses to pay for equipment elivered three months earlier.
It takes 27 procedures and more han 550 days to resolve the payment dispute in court.
Almost all rocedures must be made in writing, and require extensive legal ustification and the use of lawyers.
After this experience, Ali de ides to deal only with customers he knows well.
imnit, a young entrepreneur in Ethiopia, wants to expand er successful consulting business by taking a loan.
But she has o proof of good credit history because there are no credit infor ation registries.
Although her business has substantial assets in ccounts receivable, laws restrict her bank from using these as col ateral.
The bank knows it cannot recover the debt if Timnit de aults, because courts are inefficient and laws give creditors few owers.
Credit is denied.
The business stays small.
aving registered, hired workers, enforced contracts, and ob ained credit, Avik, a businessman in India, cannot make a profit nd goes out of business.
Faced with a 10-year-long process of go ng through bankruptcy, Avik absconds, leaving his workers, the ank, and the tax agency with nothing.
HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE f you want to know why two decades of macroeconomic reform holesale at the top have not slowed the spread of poverty and produced nough new jobs in key countries of Latin America, Africa, the Arab orld, and the former Soviet Empire, it is because there has been too lit le reform retail.
According to the IFC report, if you want to create pro uctive jobs (the kind that lead to rising standards of living), and if you ant to stimulate the growth of new businesses (the kind that innovate, ompete, and create wealth), you need a regulatory environment that akes it easy to start a business, easy to adjust a business to changing mar et circumstances and opportunities, and easy to close a business that goes ankrupt, so that the capital can be freed up for more productive uses.
It takes two days to start a business in Australia, but 203 days in Haiti nd 215 days in the Democratic Republic of Congo," the IFC study ound.
"There are no monetary costs to start a new business in Denmark, ut it costs more than five times income per capita in Cambodia and over hirteen times in Sierra Leone.
Hong Kong, Singapore, Thailand and ore than three dozen other economies require no minimum capital rom start-ups.
In contrast, in Syria the capital requirement is equivalent to ifty-six times income per capita .
Businesses in the Czech Republic and enmark can hire workers on part-time orfixed-termcontracts for any job, ithout specifying maximum duration of the contract.
In contrast, em loyment laws in El Salvador allow fixed-term contracts only for specific obs, and set their duration to be at most one year .
A simple commercial ontract is enforced in seven days in Tunisia and thirty-nine days in the etherlands, but takes almost 1,500 days in Guatemala.
The cost of en orcement is less than 1 percent of the disputed amount in Austria, Canada nd the United Kingdom, but more than 100 percent in Burkina Faso, the ominican Republic, Indonesia .
and the Philippines.
Credit bureaus ontain credit histories on almost every adult in New Zealand, Norway nd the United States.
But the credit registries in Cameroon, Ghana, akistan, Nigeria and Serbia and Montenegro have credit histories for less han 1 percent of adults.
In the United Kingdom, laws on collateral and ankruptcy give creditors strong powers to recover their money if a debtor efaults.
In Colombia, the Republic of Congo, Mexico, Oman and Tu isia, a creditor has no such rights.
It takes less than six months to go  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hrough bankruptcy proceedings in Ireland and Japan, but more than ten ears in Brazil and India.
It costs less than 1 percent of the value of the state to resolve insolvency in Finland, the Netherlands, Norway and ingaporeand nearly half the estate value in Chad, Panama, Mace onia, Venezuela, Serbia and Montenegro, and Sierra Leone."
s the IFC report notes, excessive regulation also tends to hurt most he very people it is supposed to protect.
The rich and the well connected ust buy or hustle their way around onerous regulations.
In countries that ave very regulated labor markets where it is difficult to hire and fire eople, women, especially, have a hard time finding employment.
Good regulation does not mean zero regulation," concludes the IFC tudy.
"The optimal level of regulation is not none, but may be less than hat is currently found in most countries, and especially poor ones."
The tudy offers what I call a five-step checklist for reform retail.
One, simplify nd deregulate wherever possible in competitive markets, because com etition for consumers and workers can be the best source of pressure for est practices, and overregulation just opens the door for corrupt bu eaucrats to demand bribes.
"There is no reason for Angola to have one f the most rigid employment laws if Portugal, whose laws Angola dapted, has already revised them twice to make the labor market more lexible," says the IFC study.
Two, focus on enhancing property rights.
nder de Soto s initiative, the Peruvian government in the last decade as issued property titles to 1.2 million urban squatter households.
Secure property rights have enabled parents to leave their homes and ind jobs instead of staying in to protect the property," says the IFC study.
The main beneficiaries are their children, who can now go to school."
hree, expand the use of the Internet for regulation fulfillment.
It makes t faster, more transparent, and far less open to bribery.
Four, reduce ourt involvement in business matters.
And last but certainly not least, dvises the IFC study, "Make reform a continuous process... Countries hat consistently perform well across the Doing Business indicators do so ecause of continuous reform."
hat is striking about the IFC's criteria is that many people think hey are relevant only for Peru and Argentina, but in fact some of the HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE ountries that score worst are places like Germany and Italy.
(Indeed, the erman government protested some of the findings.)
OLLOW THE LEAPIN' EPRECHAUNS  ^ \ n e of the best examples of a country that has made a huge leap forV_>/ward by choosing development and reform retail of its governance, nfrastructure, and education is Ireland.
Here's something you probably idn't know: Ireland today is the richest country in the European Union fter Luxembourg.
Yes, the country that for hundreds of years was best nown for emigration, tragic poets, famines, civil wars, and leprechauns oday has a per capita GDP higher than that of Germany, France, and ritain.
How Ireland went from the sick man of Europe to the rich man n less than a generation is an amazing story.
Ireland's turnaround actually egan in the late 1960s, when the government eliminated the fee for sec ndary education, enabling a lot more working-class kids to get a high chool or technical degree.
As a result, in the years after Ireland joined the uropean Community in 1973, it was able to draw on a much more ducated workforce than it had had in the previous generation.
By the id-1980s, though, Ireland had reaped the initial benefits of E C embershipsubsidies to build better infrastructure and a bigger market o sell its products into.
But it did not have enough competitive products o sell, because of the legacy of years of protectionism and fiscal misman gement.
The country was going broke, and most college grads were em grating.
It hadn't gotten its governance right.
We went on a borrowing, spending, and taxing spree, and that nearly rove us under," Deputy Prime Minister Mary Harney told me while I as on a visit to Dublin in June 2005.
"It was because we nearly went un er that we got the courage to change."
And change Ireland did.
In a uite unusual development, the government, the main trade unions, armers, and industrialists came together and agreed on a program of fis al austerity, slashing corporate taxes to 12.5 percent (far below the rest  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f Europe), moderating wages and prices, and aggressively courting for ign investment.
In 1996, Ireland made public college education basi ally free, creating an even more educated workforce.
The results have een striking.
Today, nine of the world's ten top pharmaceutical compa ies have operations in Ireland, as do sixteen of the top twenty medical evice companies and seven of the top ten software firms.
In 2004, reland got more foreign direct investment from America than China got rom America.
And overall government tax receipts have risen steadily.
We set up in Ireland in 1990," Michael Dell, founder of Dell omputer, explained to me in an e-mail.
"What attracted us?
[A] welleducated workforceand good universities close by.
[Also,] Ireland has n industrial and tax policy which is consistently very supportive of busi esses, independent of which political party is in power.
I believe this is ecause there are enough people who remember the very bad times to e-politicize economic development.
[Ireland also has] very good trans ortation and logistics and a good locationeasy to move products to ajor markets in Europe quickly."
Finally, added Dell, "they're compet tive, want to succeed, hungry and know how to win.
Our factory is in imerick, but we also have several thousand sales and technical people utside of Dublin.
The talent in Ireland has proven to be a wonderful re ource for us.
Fun fact: We are Ireland's largest exporter."
ntel opened its first chip factory in Ireland in 1993.
James Jarrett, an ntel vice president, said Intel was attracted by Ireland's large pool of edu ated young men and women, low corporate taxes, and other incentives hat saved Intel roughly $1 billion over ten years.
Ireland's national health arewhich certainly lightens Intel's health coverage obligationsdidn't urt, either.
"We have forty-seven hundred employees there now in four actories, and we are even doing some high-end chip designing in hannon with Irish engineers," he said.
arry Kraemer Jr., the former C E O of Baxter International, a medical quipment maker that has made several investments in Ireland, explained hat "the energy level, the work ethic, the tax optimization, and the flexi ility of the labor supply" all made Ireland infinitely more attractive to in est in than France or Germany, where it is enormously costly to fire even ne worker.
The Irish, he added, had the self-confidence that if they kept HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE heir labor laws flexible, some jobs would go, but new jobs would keep omingand that is exactly what has happened.
Ireland is "playing of ense," Kraemer said, while Germany and France are "playing defense," nd the more they try to protect every old job, the fewer new ones they ttract.
Look at the results: In 1990, Ireland's total workforce was 1.1 mil ion.
By the end of 2005, it was roughly 2 million, with no real unem loyment.
ut Ireland has started to play offense in a lot of other ways as well.
It nitially focused on attracting investments from U.S. high-tech compa ies by offering them quality infrastructure, a flexible, educated work orce, and low corporate taxes.
But now, explained Ireland's minister of ducation, Mary Hanafin, the country wants to take reform retail in ed cation to a new level.
It has started a campaign to double the number f Ph.D.'s it graduates in science and engineering by 2010, and it has set p various funds to get global companies, and brainy people of all kinds, o come to Ireland to do research.
Ireland is now actively recruiting hinese scientists in particular.
"It is good for our own quality students to e mixing with quality students from abroad," Hanafin said.
"Industry ill go where the major research goes."
Ireland set up a science founda ion to give grants to any researcher from anywhere in the world who had n idea that he or she would pursue in Ireland and that might one day roduce a company or a product.
Between 2001 and 2005, Science Foun ation Ireland established more than 160 new research groups, 34 of hem led by leading scientists who have come to Ireland from laborato ies abroad, according to an independent report commissioned by the rish government.
Incidentally, the first head of Science Foundation reland was an American who had worked at the National Science oundation.
reland's story underscores the fact that capital does not just move round the world looking for the cheapest labor.
If it did, all the jobs ould be in Haiti and Bangladesh.
It is looking for the most productive abor at the lowest price, which means that in order to attract the capital, our country has to get those four basics infrastructure, education, gov rnance, and environmentright.
John Chambers, the C E O of Cisco ystems, which uses a global supply chain to build the routers that run  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he Internet and is constantly being wooed to invest in one country or an ther, said it best: "The jobs are going to go where the best-educated orkforce is with the most competitive infrastructure and environment or creativity and supportive government.
It is inevitable.
And by defini ion those people will have the best standard of living.
This may or may ot be the countries who led the Industrial Revolution."
ndeed, Sir John Rose, the chief executive of Rolls-Royce, once re arked to me that in what I call the flat world we will speak less and less bout "developed, developing, and underdeveloped countries" and ore and more about "smart, smarter, and smartest countries."
t least some countries are paying attention.
Ireland's prime minister, ertie Ahern, told me in June 2005, "I've met the premier of China five imes in the last two years."
ULTURE ATTERS: LOCALIZATION  ile the stakes in reform retail today are higher than ever, and ost countries know it, one need only look around the world to otice that not every country can pull it off.
Unlike reform wholesale, hich could be done by a handful of people using administrative orders r just authoritarian dictates, reform retail requires a much wider base of ublic and parliamentary buy-in if it is going to overcome vested eco omic and political interests.
So why do some countries get over this re orm retail hump, with leaders able to mobilize their people to really mprove their infrastructure, education, and governance, and other coun ries stall?
ne answer is culture.
o reduce a country's economic performance to culture alone is ridicu ous, but to analyze a country's economic performance without reference o culture is equally ridiculous, although that is what many economists and olitical scientists want to do.
This subject is highly controversial and is iewed as politically incorrect to introduce.
So it is often the elephant in he room that no one wants to speak about.
But I am going to speak about HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE t here, for a very simple reason: As the world goes flat, and more and ore of the tools of collaboration get distributed and commoditized, the ap between cultures that have the will, the way, and the focus to quickly dopt these new tools and apply them and those that do not will matter ore.
The differences between the two will become amplified.
wo books strongly influenced my thinking in this regard.
One is The ealth and Poverty of Nations, by the economist David Landes.
He ar ues that although climate, natural resources, and geography all help to xplain why some countries are able to make the leap to industrialization nd others are not, the key factor is actually a country's cultural endow ents, particularly the degree to which it has internalized the values of ard work, thrift, honesty, patience, and tenacity, as well as the degree to hich it is open to change, new technology, and equality for women.
he other book is The Central Liberal Truth: How Politics Can Change  Culture and Save It from Itself by Lawrence E. Harrison, a retired SAID diplomat who is now a professor at Tufts.
Harrison argues that a ociety maintains cultural continuity through a variety of instruments nd institutions "that transmit its values and attitudes from generation to eneration [through] child-rearing, education, the media, and leader hip," as well as religion, which may be the most salient of all.
Indeed, arrison argues that "when it comes to the relationship between religion nd human progress, I find compelling evidence that some religions do etter than others in promoting the goals of democratic politics, social ustice and prosperity."
Some religions and cultures are "progress prone," rgues Harrison, and some are "progress resistant," but history is full of xamples of cultures changing from one to the other under different po itical and economic circumstances or leaders.
n my own travels, two aspects of culture have struck me as particu arly relevant in the flat world.
One is how outward your culture is: To hat degree is it open to foreign influences and ideas?
How well does it glocalize"?
The other, more intangible, is how inward your culture is.
y that I mean, to what degree is there a sense of national solidarity and  focus on development, to what degree is there trust within the society or strangers to collaborate together, and to what degree are the elites in he country concerned with the masses and ready to invest at home, or  H E W O R L D IS F L A T re they indifferent to their own poor and more interested in investing broad?
he more you have a culture that naturally glocalizesthat is, the ore your culture easily absorbs foreign ideas and global best practices nd melds those with its own traditionsthe greater advantage you will ave in a flat world.
The natural ability to glocalize has been one of the trengths of Indian culture, American culture, Japanese culture, and, ately, Chinese culture.
The Indians, for instance, take the view that the oguls come, the Moguls go, the British come, the British go, we take he best and leave the restbut we still eat curry, our women still wear aris, and we still live in tightly bound extended family units.
That's glocalizing at its best.
Cultures that are open and willing to change have a huge advantage n this world," said Jerry Rao, the MphasiS C E O who heads the Indian igh-tech trade association.
"My great-grandmother was illiterate.
My randmother went to grade two.
My mother did not go to college.
My sis er has a master's degree in economics, and my daughter is at the niversity of Chicago.
We have done all this in living memory, but we ave been willing to change .
You have to have a strong culture, but lso the openness to adapt and adopt from others.
The cultural exclusivists have a real disadvantage.
Think about it, think about the time hen the emperor in China threw out the British ambassador.
Who did t hurt?
It hurt the Chinese.
Exclusivity is a dangerous thing."
penness is critical, added Rao, "because you start tending to respect eople for their talent and abilities.
When you are chatting with another eveloper in another part of the world, you don't know what his or her olor is.
You are dealing with people on the basis of talentnot race or thnicityand that changes, subtly, over time your whole view of hu an beings, if you are in this talent-based and performance-based world ather than the background-based world."
his helps explain why so many Muslim countries have been strug ling as the world goes flat.
For complicated cultural and historical rea ons, many of them do not glocalize well, although there are plenty of xceptionsnamely, Turkey, Lebanon, Bahrain, Dubai, Indonesia, and alaysia.
All of these latter countries, though, tend to be the more secu- HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE ar Muslim nations.
In a world where the single greatest advantage a cul ure can have is the ability to foster adaptability and adoptability, the uslim world today is dominated by a religious clergy that literally bans jtihad, reinterpretation of the principles of Islam in light of current ircumstances.
hink about the whole mind-set of bin Ladenism.
It is to "purge" audi Arabia of all foreigners and foreign influences.
That is exactly the pposite of glocalizing and collaborating.
Tribal culture and thinking till dominate in many Arab countries, and the tribal mind-set is also nathema to collaboration.
What is the motto of the tribalist?
"Me and y brother against my cousin; me, my brother, and my cousin against he outsider."
And what is the motto of the globalists, those who build ollaborative supply chains?
"Me and my brother and my cousin, three riends from childhood, four people in Australia, two in Beijing, six in angalore, three from Germany, and four people we've met only over he Internet all make up a single global supply chain."
In the flat world, he division of labor is steadily becoming more and more complex, with  lot more people interacting with a lot of other people they don't know nd may never meet.
If you want to have a modern complex division of abor, you have to be able to put more trust in strangers.
n the Arab-Muslim world, argues David Landes, certain cultural at itudes have in many ways become a barrier to development, particularly he tendency to still treat women as a source of danger or pollution to be ut off from the public space and denied entry into economic activities.
hen a culture believes that, it loses a large portion of potential produc ivity of the society.
A system that privileges the men from birth on, andes also argues, simply because they are male, and gives them power ver their sisters and other female members of society, is bad for the men.
t builds in them a sense of entitlement that discourages what it takes to mprove, to advance, and to achieve.
This sort of discrimination, he otes, is not something limited to the Arab Middle East, of course.
ndeed, strains of it are found in different degrees all around the world, ven in so-called advanced industrial societies.
he Arab-Muslim world's resistance to glocalization is something that ome liberal Arab commentators are now focusing on.
Consider a May 5,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T 004, article in the Saudi English-language daily Arab News by liberal audi journalist Raid Qusti, titled "How Long Before the First Step?"
Terrorist incidents in Saudi Arabia are more or less becoming everyday news.
Every time I hope and pray that it ends, it only seems to get orse," Qusti wrote.
"One explanation to why all of this is happening was rought up by the editor in chief oAl-Riyadh newspaper, Turki Al-Sudairi, n a program about determining the roots of the terrorist acts.
He said that he people carrying out these attacks shared the ideology of the Juhaiman ovement that seized the Grand Mosque in the seventies.
They had an deology of accusing others of being infidels and giving themselves a free and to kill them, be it Westernerswho, according to them, ought to be icked out of the Arabian Peninsulaor the Muslim believer who does ot follow their path.
They disappeared in the eighties and nineties from he public eye and have again emerged with their destructive ideology.
he question Al-Sudairi forgot to bring up was: What are we Saudis going o do about it?
If we as a nation decline to look at the root causes, as we ave for the past two decades, it will only be a matter of time before another group of people with the same ideology springs up.
Have we helped reate these monsters?
Our education system, which does not stress tolerance of other faithslet alone tolerance of followers of other Islamic chools of thoughtis one thing that needs to be re-evaluated from top to ottom.
Saudi culture itself and the fact that the majority of us do not accept other lifestyles and impose our own on other people is another.
And he fact that from fourth to 12th grade we do not teach our children that here are other civilizations in the world and that we are part of the global ommunity and only stress the Islamic empires over and over is also orth re-evaluating."
t is simply too easily forgotten that when it comes to economic activities, one of the greatest virtues a country or community can have is a culture f tolerance.
When tolerance is the norm, everyone flourishesbecause olerance breeds trust, and trust is the foundation of innovation and entrepreneurship.
Increase the level of trust in any group, company, or ociety, and only good things happen.
"China began its astounding commercial and industrial takeoff only when Mao Zedong's odiously intolerant form of communism was scrapped in favor of what might be called HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE otalitarian laissez-faire," wrote the British historian Paul Johnson in a une 21, 2004, essay in Forbes.
"India is another example.
It is the nature f the Hindu religion to be tolerant and, in its own curious way, permis ive .
When left to themselves, Indians (like the Chinese) always pros er as a community.
Take the case of Uganda's Indian population, which as expelled by the horrific dictator Idi Amin and received into the tol rant society of Britain.
There are now more millionaires in this group han in any other recent immigrant community in Britain.
They are a triking example of how far hard work, strong family bonds and devotion o education can carry a people who have been stripped of all their orldly assets."
Islam, down through the years, has thrived when it fos ered a culture of tolerance, as in Moorish Spain.
But in its modern form, n too many cases Islam has been captured and interpreted by spiritual eaders who do not embrace a culture of tolerance, change, or innova ion, and that, Johnson noted, surely has contributed to lagging eco omic growth in many Muslim lands.
ere we come again to the coefficient of flatness.
Countries without atural resources are much more likely, through human evolution, to evelop the habits of openness to new ideas, because it is the only way hey can survive and advance.
he good news, though, is that not only does culture matter, but cul ure can change.
Cultures are not wired into our human DNA.
They are  product of the contextgeography, education level, leadership, and istorical experience of any society.
As those change, so too can cul ure.
Japan and Germany went from highly militarized societies to ighly pacifist and staunchly democratic societies in the last fifty years.
ahrain was one of the first Arab countries to discover oil.
It was the first rab country to run out of oil.
And it was thefirstArab country in the Arab ulf to hold an election for parliament where women could run and ote.
China during the Cultural Revolution seemed like a nation in the rip of a culture of ideological madness.
China today is a synonym for ragmatism.
Muslim Spain was one of the most tolerant societies in the istory of the world.
Muslim Saudi Arabia today is one of the most intol rant.
Muslim Spain was a trading and merchant culture where people ad to live by their wits and therefore learned to live well with others;  H E W O R L D IS F L A T audi Arabia today can get by just selling oil.
Yet right next to Saudi Arabia its Dubai, an Arab city-state that has used its petrodollars to build the trad ng, tourist, service, and computing center of the Arab Gulf.
Dubai is one f the most tolerant, cosmopolitan places in the world, with, it often eems, more sushi bars and golf courses than mosquesand tourists don't ven need a visa.
So yes, culture matters, but culture is nested in contexts, ot genes, and as those contexts, and local leaders, change and adapt, so oo can culture.
HE NTANGIBLE HINGS  u can tell a lot by just comparing skylines.
Like many Indian mericans, Dinakar Singh, the hedge fund manager, regularly goes ack to India to visit family.
In the winter of 2004, he went back to New elhi for a visit.
When I saw him a few months later, he told me about he moment when he realized why India's economy as a whole still had ot taken off as much as it should haveoutside of the high-tech sector.
I was on the sixth floor of a hotel in New Delhi," he recalled, "and hen I looked out the window I could see for miles.
How come?
Because ou do not have assured power in Delhi for elevators, so there are not any tall buildings."
No sensible investor would want to build a tall uilding in a city where the power could go out at any moment and you ight have to walk up twenty flights of stairs.
The result is more urban prawl and an inefficient use of space.
I told Singh that his story reminded e of a trip I had just taken to Dalian, China.
I had been to Dalian in 998, and when I went back in 2004,1 did not recognize the city.
There ere so many new buildings, including modern glass-and-steel towers, hat I began to question whether I had actually visited there in 1998. hen I added another recollection.
I went to school in Cairo in the sum er of 1974.
The three most prominent buildings in the city then were he Nile Hilton, the Cairo Tower, and the Egyptian T V building.
Thirty ears later, in 2004, they are still the most prominent buildings there; the airo skyline has barely changed.
Whenever I go back to Cairo, I know HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE xactly where I am.
I visited Mexico City shortly before Dalian, where I ad not visited in five years.
I found it much cleaner than I had remem ered, thanks to a citywide campaign by the mayor.
There were also a few ew buildings up, but not as many as I expected after a decade of NAFTA.
nside the buildings, though, I found my Mexican friends a little de ressed.
They told me that Mexico had lost its groove  it just wasn't grow ng like it had been, and people's self-confidence was waning.
o in Delhi, you can see forever.
In Cairo, the skyline seems forever he same.
In China, if you miss visiting a city for a year, it's like you aven't been there in forever.
And in Mexico City, just when Mexicans hought they had turned the corner forever, they ran smack into China, oming the other way and running much faster.
hat explains these differences?
We know the basic formula for eco omic success reform wholesale, followed by reform retail, plus good overnance, education, infrastructure, and the ability to glocalize.
What e don't know, though, and what I would bottle and sell if I did, is the an wer to the question of why one country gets its act together to do all these hings in a sustained manner and why another one doesn't.
Why does one ountry's skyline change overnight and another's doesn't change over half  century?
The only answer I have been able to find is something that annot be defined: I call it "the intangible things."
These are primarily wo qualities: a society's ability and willingness to pull together and sacri ice for the sake of economic development and the presence in a society f leaders with the vision to see what needs to be done in terms of devel pment and the willingness to use power to push for change rather than o enrich themselves and preserve the status quo.
Some countries (such s South Korea and Taiwan) seem to be able to focus their energies on he priority of economic development, and others (such as Egypt and yria) get distracted by ideology or local feuds.
Some countries have eaders who use their time in office to try to drive modernization rather han to personally enrich themselves.
And some countries simply have enal elites, who use their time in office to line their pockets and then nvest those riches in Swiss real estate.
Why India had leaders who built nstitutes of technology and Pakistan had leaders who did not is a prod ct of history, geography, and culture that I can only summarize as one  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f those intangible things.
But even though these intangibles are not eas ly measured, they really do matter.
he best way I know to illustrate this is by comparing Mexico and hina.
Mexico, on paper, seemed perfectly positioned to thrive in a flat orld.
It was right next door to the biggest, most powerful economy in he world.
It signed a free-trade agreement with the United States and anada in the 1990s and was poised to be a springboard to Latin merica for both these huge economies.
And it had a valuable natural esource in oil, which accounted for more than a third of government in ome.
China, by contrast, was thousands of miles away, burdened by verpopulation, with few natural resources, with its best labor crowded nto a coastal plain, and with a burdensome debt legacy from fifty years f Communist rule.
Ten years ago, if you took the names off these two ountries and just gave someone their profiles, he surely would have bet n Mexico.
And yet China has replaced Mexico as the second-largest ex orter of goods into the United States.
And there is a general sense, even mong Mexicans, that even though China is thousands of miles away rom America, it is growing closer to America economically, while exico, right on America's border, is becoming thousands of miles away.
am by no means writing Mexico off.
Mexico, in the fullness of time, ay turn out to be the slow-but-sure tortoise to China's hare.
China still as a huge political transition to get through, which could derail it at any oment.
Moreover, Mexico has many entrepreneurs who are as Chinese s the most entrepreneurial Chinese.
Mexico would not have exported 138 billion worth of goods to the United States in 2003 if that were not he case.
And you have many rural Chinese who are no more advanced r productive than rural Mexicans.
But on balance, when you add it all p, the fact is that China has become the hare and Mexico has not, even hough Mexico seemed to start with so many more natural advantages hen the world went flat.
Why?
his is a question Mexicans themselves are asking.
When you go to exico City these days, Mexicans will tell you that they are hearing that giant sucking sound" in stereo.
"We are caught between India and hina," Jorge Castaneda, Mexico's former foreign minister, told me in HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE 004.
"It is very difficult for us to compete with the Chinese, except with igh-value-added industries.
Where we should be competing, the services rea, we are hit by the Indians with their back offices and call centers."
o doubt China is benefiting to some degree from the fact that it still as an authoritarian system that can steamroll vested interests and ar haic practices.
Beijing's leadership can order many reforms from the op down, whether it is a new road or accession to the World Trade rganization.
ut China today also has better intangiblesan ability to summon nd focus local energies on reform retail.
China may be an authoritarian tate, but it nevertheless has strong state institutions and a bureaucracy hat manages to promote a lot of people on merit to key decision-making ositions, and it has a certain public-spiritedness.
The Mandarin tradition f promoting bureaucrats who see their role as promoting and protecting he interests of the state is still alive and well in China.
"China has a tra ition of meritocracya tradition that is also carried on in Korea and apan," said Francis Fukuyama, author of the classic The End of History nd the Last Man.
"All of them also have a basic sense of'stateness' where public servants] are expected to look to the long-term interests of the tate" and are rewarded by the system for doing so.
exico, by contrast, moved during the 1990s from a basically oneparty authoritarian state to a multiparty democracy.
So just when Mexico eeds to summon all its will and energy for reform retail on the micro evel, it has to go through the much slower, albeit more legitimate, dem cratic process of constituency building.
In Mexico, "we did the first tages of structural reform from the top down," said Guillermo Ortiz, the entral Bank governor.
"The next stage is much more difficult.
You have o work from the bottom up.
You have to create the wider consensus to ush the reforms in a democratic context."
In other words, any Mexican resident who wants to make changes has to aggregate so many more in erest groupslike herding catsto implement a reform than his auto ratic predecessors, who could have done it by fiat.
A lot of these interest roups, whether unions or oligarchs, have powerful vested interests in he status quo and the power to strangle reforms.
And Mexico's state sys-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ern, like that of so many of its Latin American neighbors, has a long his ory of simply being an instrument of patronage for the ruling party or lo al interests, not the national interest.
nother of these intangible things is how much your culture prizes ducation.
India and China both have a long tradition of parents telling heir children that the greatest thing they can be in life is an engineer or  doctor.
But building the schools to make that happen in Mexico sim ly has not been done.
India and China each have more than fifty thou and students studying in the United States today.
They come from bout twelve time zones away.
Mexico, which is smaller but right next oor, has only about ten thousand.
Mexico is also right next door to the orld's biggest economy, which speaks English.
But Mexico has not aunched any crash program in English education or invested in schol rships to send large numbers of Mexican students to the United States o study.
There is a "disconnect," said President Zedillo, among Mexico's olitical establishment, the challenges of globalization, and the degree o which anyone is educating and harnessing the Mexican public to this ask.
You would have to look a long time for a graduate science or math rogram at an American university that is dominated by Mexican stu ents the way most are dominated by Chinese and Indian students.
t would be easy to conclude from just looking at Mexico and China hat democracy may be a hindrance to reform retail.
I think it is prema ure to conclude that.
I think the real issue is leadership.
There are emocracies that are blessed with leaders who are able to make the sale nd get their people focused on reform retail Margaret Thatcher in ngland comes to mindand there are democracies that drift for a long ime without biting the bulletmodern Germany, for example.
There re autocracies that really get focused modern Chinaand there are thers that just drift aimlessly, unwilling to summon their people be ause the leaders are so illegitimate they are afraid of inflicting any ainZimbabwe.
exico and Latin America generally have "fantastic potential," says resident Zedillo.
"Latin America was ahead of everyone thirty years ago, ut for twenty-five years we have been basically stagnant and the others are HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE oving closer and well ahead.
Our political systems are not capable of pro essing and adopting and executing those [reform retail] ideas.
We are still iscussing prehistory.
Things that are taken for granted everywhere we are till discussing as if we are living in the 1960s.
To this day you cannot speak penly about a market economy in Latin America."
China is moving every onth, added Zedillo, "and we are taking years and years to decide on el mentary reforms whose needs should be strikingly urgent for any human eing.
We are not competitive because we don't have infrastructure; you eed people to pay taxes.
How many new highways have been built con ecting Mexico with the U.S. since NAFTA?
[Virtually none.]
Many eople who would benefit from government expenditure don't pay taxes.
he only way for government to serve is to get people to pay higher taxes, but] then the populism comes up and kills it."
Mexican newspaper recently ran a story about how the Converse hoe company was making tennis shoes in China using Mexican glue.
The whole article was about why are we giving them our glue," said edillo, "when the right attitude would be, How much more glue can e sell them?
We still need to break some mental barriers."
t is not that Mexico has failed to modernize its export industries.
It is osing ground to China primarily because China has changed even aster and more broadly, particularly in educating knowledge workers.
As usiness consultant Daniel H. Rosen pointed out in an essay in The nternational Economy (Spring 2003), Mexico and China both saw their hare of global exports grow in many of the same areas during the boom ng 1990sfrom auto parts to electronics to toys and sporting goods  ut China's share was growing faster.
This was not just because of what hina was doing right but also because of what Mexico was doing rong, which was not steadily honing its competitiveness with microreforms.
What Mexico succeeded in doing was to create islands of com etitiveness, like Monterrey, where it got things right and could take dvantage of proximity to the United States, but the Mexican govern ent never had a strategy for melting those islands into the rest of the ountry.
This helps explain why from 1996 to 2002, Mexico's ranking in he Global Competitiveness Report actually fell while China's rose.
And  H E W O R L D IS F L A T his was not just about cheap wages, said Rosen.
It was about China's ad antages in education, privatization, infrastructure, quality control, midlevel management, and the introduction of new technology.
So China is eating Mexico's lunch," concluded Rosen, "but more due o the Mexican inability to capitalize on successes and induce broader re orm than to China's lower wage workers per se."
In other words, it's reform etail, stupid.
According to the Doing Business in 200S report, it takes an verage of fifty-eight days to start a business in Mexico, compared with ight in Singapore and nine in Turkey.
It takes seventy-four days to register  property in Mexico, but only twelve in the United States.
Mexico's cor orate income tax rate of 34 percent is twice as high as China's.
he McKinsey Quarterly report "Beyond Cheap Labor" noted that ince 2000, as China joined the W T O and started to take advantage of he flattening of the world, Mexico lost 270,000 assembly jobs, and hun reds of factories closed.
But the main advice the report had for Mexico nd other middle-income countries feeling squeezed by China was this: Rather than fixating on jobs lost to China, these countries should re ember a fact of economic life: no place can remain the world's low-cost roducer forevereven China will lose that title one day.
Instead of try ng to defend low-wage assembly jobs, Mexico and other middle-income ountries should focus on creating jobs that add higher value.
Only if ore productive companies with higher-value-added activities replace ess productive ones can middle-income economies continue down the evelopment path."
n short, the only way for Mexico to thrive is with a strategy of reform etail that will enable it to beat China to the top, not the bottom, because hina is not focused on beating Mexico as much as it is on beating merica.
But winning that kind of race to the top takes intangible focus nd will.
ou cannot maintain rising standards of living in a flattening world hen you are up against competitors who are getting not only their fun amentals right but also their intangibles.
China does not just want to et rich.
It wants to get powerful.
China doesn't just want to learn how to ake G M cars.
It wants to be GM and put GM out of business.
Anyone ho doubts that should spend time with young Chinese.
HE IRGIN OF GUADALUPE aid Luis Rubio, president of Mexico's Center of Research for De elopment, "The more self-confidence you have, the more it diminishes our mythologies and complexes.
One of the great things about Mexico n the early 1990s was that Mexicans saw that they could do it, they could ake it."
A lot of that self-confidence, though, has been lost in Mexico in ecent years, because the government stopped reforming.
"A lack of selfconfidence leads a country to keep chewing on the past," added Rubio.
A lack of self-confidence [in Mexico] means that everyone in the coun ry thinks the U.S. is going to take Mexico to the cleaners."
That is why AFTA was so important for Mexico's self-confidence.
"What NAFTA ccomplished was to get Mexicans to think forward and outward instead f inward and backward.
[But] NAFTA was seen [by its architects] as an nd more than a beginning.
It was seen as the conclusion of a process of olitical and economic reforms."
Unfortunately, he added, "Mexico did ot have a strategy for going forward."
ill Rogers said it a long time ago: "Even if you're on the right track, ou'll get run over if you just sit there."
The flatter the world gets, the aster that will happen.
Mexico got itself on the right track with reform holesale, but then, for a lot of tangible and intangible reasons, it just sat here and reform retail stalled.
The more Mexico just sits there, the more t is going to get run over.
ANY SPEEDS, ONE IRECTION m often criticized as being a starry-eyed advocate of globalization.
ell, anyone reading this book knows that globalization has its up ides and downsides.
But I will plead guilty to one thing: I do get a little ump in my throat when I see countries like China, India, or Ireland dopting a basically proglobalization strategy, adapting it to their own olitical, social, and economic conditions, and reaping the benefits.
Of ourse, there are costs to this growth as well in terms of environment, ocial cohesion, and economic equality, which governments need to onitor and mitigatebut let's stop downplaying the economic ben-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T fits, and let's stop pretending that the antiglobalization advocates have ny realistic strategy for bringing as many people out of poverty as uicklyif at all.
There are many speeds that a country can go at down his globalization pathand each country has to choose the right speed or its particular social and political circumstances.
But there is only one ight direction.
o one said this better than Baldev Raj Nayar, emeritus professor f political science at McGill University, in his monograph India's lobalization: Evaluating the Economic Impact, which was excerpted by aleGlobal Online, February 1, 2007.
While Nayar uses the language of conomics, what he is saying in essence is that thanks to adopting a glob lization strategy India has experienced an economic revolution: s the driving force of the world economy since the mid-1970s, lobalization has become a lodestone for a wide-ranging attack cross a large expanse of the developing world for its alleged ma ign consequences.
Reduced to its essentials, the attack posits the mpact of globalization to be economic stagnation, deindustrialization, economic destabilization and growing inequality.
arked by vigor, the critique lacks in empirical rigor .
Put imply, India has been a significant beneficiary of globalization espite its rather modest integration into the world economy.
fter a stringent regime of "autarky and command and control conomy," from 1956 to 1975, India started on a slow path of rein egration into the world economy, albeit in nascent form.
nterestingly, India's reintegration coincides with the onset of the arger process of globalization.
However, carried out in stealth, conomic liberalization, the national policy counterpart of glob lization, remained tentative and minimal in India.
Not until 991 did India, amidst enormous economic crisis, make a para igm shift to liberalization, though still limited.
mpirical comparison of the period before and after liberal zation demonstrates that, instead of economic stagnation, India chieved a marked acceleration in economic growth after liberal- HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE zation.
Indeed, India broke the barrier of stagnation that had een the lot of the country before globalization.
India's rate of rowth from 1975 to 2007 has been over 5.5 percent, compared to he derisively termed "Hindu" rate of growth of 3.4 percent over he period 1956 to 1975, and especially to the pathetic 2.6 percent ver the decade prior to the nascent liberalization in 1975.
In the ozen years from 1995 to 2007 the growth rate has been over 6.5 ercent; during the last four years India has sustained an un recedented average growth rate of over 8 percent.
t is difficult to exaggerate this accomplishment in growth ac eleration.
It has provided additional resources not only for in estment in human capital but also for expenditures on the social ectors and poverty alleviation.
Besides, the economic dynamism ssociated with this growth has imparted a self-confidence for suc essfully building a consolidated nation-state.
It has indeed trans ormed a country that had been mocked as "the sick man of sia"an inveterate supplicant for foreign aid into a credible ontender for a major role in the balance of power in Asia.
imilarly, far from the specter of deindustrialization held out y the critics, foreign imports have not swamped Indian industry fter tariffs were lowered as part of India's reintegration into the orld economy.
Rather, Indian industry has grown at a higher ate than it had prior to liberalization of the economy.
The growth ate of manufacturing has been around 6.5 percent since 1975 nd close to 7 percent during the dozen years up to 2006.
At the atter rate, the value of manufacturing doubles about every 10 earsnot exactly deindustrialization.
The advance in manufac uring has been broad-based and not limited to consumption oods... s for economic destabilization, the autarkic period prior to he initial and nascent opening to globalization in 1975 was rid en with grave economic crises.
Indeed, throughout that en ire period, India labored under an enormous and debilitating oreign-exchange constraint, which both retarded and distorted its  H E W O R L D IS F L A T evelopment.
After the paradigm shift to economic liberaliza ion in the early 1990s, India has not yet seen another economic risis and no longer faces a foreign-exchange constraint be ause of its accumulating reserves, currently at some $170 billion.
he absence of a foreign-exchange crisis has boosted the selfconfidence of the nation.
The reserves had sunk to $1.2 billion uring the 1991 crisis.
s for impoverishment, the globalization period has seen wel are enhancement through a long-term decline in poverty.
The roportion of population below the poverty line was 55 percent in 973, after which there has occurred a secular decline.
By 2000 it tood at 26 percent.
Although the last figure is disputed because of hanges in survey design, there can be no doubt about the longterm decline.
The line of causality here clearly runs from global zation and liberalization to acceleration in the growth rate and hen to poverty reductiona remarkable testimony to the robust ess of the much-maligned "trickle down theory."
till, it would be heartless, indeed cruel, to make the perfor ance on poverty reduction an occasion to celebrate liberaliza ion, as much poverty still remains, even when defined minimally n caloric-intake terms.
Indeed, the persistence of poverty for mas ive numbers, inherited from the past, underscores the passion hat goes into critiques of globalization.
However, the conclusion hat flows from a comparative analysis of the trends since the be inning of liberalization in 1975 when set against the condition rior to it, of staggeringly high poverty and economic stagna ionis different.
Higher rates of economic growth, facilitated by eriodic doses of liberalization, pushed forward poverty reduc ion.
The policy implication therefore is that more, not less, liber lization fosters and sustains rapid economic growth .
C]ontrary to the position of the critics, globalization has ewed as the agent of deliverance for India from economic stag ation and perpetual economic crises even as it has reduced overty.
However, India continues to be dogged by deep-seated ocietal problems that persisted throughout the autarkic period.
HE VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE ut it is precisely the accelerated growth generated by globaliza ion that has provided the additional resources to alleviate, if not et to remove, them.
et s cut the nonsense: When done right and in a sustained manner, lobalization has a huge potential to lift large numbers of people out of overty.
And when I see large numbers of people escaping poverty, in laces like India, China, or Ireland, well, yes, I get a little emotional.
No pologies.
ompanies and he Flat World LEVEN ow Companies Cope ut of clutter, find simplicity.
rom discord, find harmony.
n the middle of difficulty, lies opportunity.
Albert Einstein   I conducted interviews for this book, I kept hearing the same hrase from different business executives.
It was strange; they all used it, as if they had all been talking to one another.
The phrase as, "Just in the last couple of years..." Time and again, entrepreneurs nd innovators from all different types of businesses, large and small, told e that "just in the last couple of years" they had been able to do things hey had never dreamed possible before, or that they were being forced o do things they had never dreamed necessary before.
am convinced that these entrepreneurs and CEOs were responding o the flattening of the world.
Each was figuring out a strategy for his or er company to thrive or at least survive in this new environment.
Just as ndividuals need a strategy for coping with the flattening of the world, so oo do companies.
Economist Paul Romer is fond of saying, "Everyone ants economic growth, but nobody wants change."
Unfortunately, you annot have one without the other, especially when the playing field hifts as dramatically as it has since the year 2000. his is not a how-to-succeed-in-business book.
What I have learned n researching this book, though, is that the companies that have man-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ged to survive and grow today are those that are most prepared to hange.
They are the ones that recognizefaster than their competi orseverything new that the flattening of the world enables and every hing new that it enjoins and are the first to develop strategies to exploit he new possibilities and to cope with the new requirements.
his chapter highlights some of the rules that these companies live y in a flat world.
ule #1: When the world is flat, whatever can be done will be done.
The nly question is whether it will be done by you or to you.
his rule should come as no surprise: When, as a result of the flattening f the world, so many people have so much connectivity, and so many eople have access to low-cost tools of innovation, and so many people re able to tap into each other's markets, workforces, brainpower, and deas to discover and invent new thingsand then quickly disseminate hem around the globewell, then, whatever can be done will be done.
o if you have an idea, pursue it.
Because someone else will have a sim lar idea, and pursue it, faster than you think.
see evidence of this everywhere I go todayindividuals, entre reneurs, and big companies mixing and mashing together all sorts of echnologies, markets, and innovations to start new businesses out of no here or give old businesses some totally new dimension.
I can't prove t, but I think this trend, which is not always easy to see, is becoming ne of the most powerful drivers of the global economy today, fostering ore small and medium-size businesses with a global reach than any ne realizes or economists can fully measure.
Let me give you just a few xamples: n May 2006,1 was invited to a conference at the Central European niversity in Budapest.
While I was there, the conference organizers rranged a car to pick me up, drive me to appointments, and return me o the airport at the close of the meeting.
On my way from downtown udapest to the airport, early on a Sunday morning, the driver, Jozsef ak, said to me that if I had any friends who were planning to come to ungary, would I please have them contact him through his Web site?
OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E e explained that on the site, they could see the different cars he has to ffer and could choose which one they'd like to ride in and what sort of ervice they would need diplomatic, business, or tourism.
I was half wake at the time, but the notion that my Hungarian driver had his own eb site piqued my interest.
How much business do you get online?"
I asked him.
"About 20 to 5 percent," the Communist-era-engineer-turned-limo-proprietor an wered.
So as soon as I got home I checked out his site: www.felimo.hu.
t was very elaborate, describing Bak's services in English, Magyar, and erman, with pictures of all the different cars.
It even had music!
Sud enly a thought popped into my head.
It was something former secretary f state James A. Baker III used to say after he retired from government: n Washington, you know you're out of o f f i c e "when your limousine is yel ow and your driver speaks Farsi."
I would say, "You know that in the flat orld, whatever can be done is being done when your Hungarian driver as his own Web site in Magyar, German, and Englishwith music!"
visited Peru in June 2006 on a tour sponsored by Conservation nternational.
One day our tour guide, Alfredo Ferreyros, mentioned a eruvian friend of his who was selling traditional handcrafted Peruvian ishware from his village near Cuzco "on the Internet."
I thought to my elf, "Well, that's nice.
I am glad e-commerce is getting down to Peruvian illages."
But then Alfredo added this kicker: His friend was looking into hether he could get his traditional Peruvian ceramics made more heaply in China and have them shipped directly to the United States rom there!
Whatever can be done will be doneand better to do it with hina yourself before the villager next door does.
he New Yorker ran a cartoon by Peter Steiner of two dogs, one sitting t a computer keyboard saying to the other, "On the Internet, nobody nows you're a dog."
When the world is flat, nobody knows you're ruguay.
tiny country of 3.4 million people, wedged between Brazil and rgentina, Uruguay has come from nowhere to partner with India's big est software company, Tata Consultancy Services, to create in just five ears one of the largest outsourcing operations in Latin America.
Yes, hen Tata's Indian employees in Mumbai are asleep, its 650 Uruguayan  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ngineers and programmers now pick up the work and help run the omputers and backroom operations for the likes of American Express, rocter & Gamble, and some major U.S. banksall from Montevideo.
ow did this happen?
Simple.
Today, with the right imagination, Inter et bandwidth, and a modest amount of capital, anyone can assemble  global company by matching workers and customers from anywhere o do anything for anyone.
o Gabriel Rozman decided it was going to be done by him, not to im.
A retired partner from Ernst & Young in America who was raised n Uruguay, he hatched the idea of partnering with Tata to make ontevideo a global outsourcing hub.
He did not have a single client or mployee when he approached Tata.
He had just two things: a gut in tinct that Uruguay's quality educational system had produced plenty f good, low-cost engineers and a gut desire to do something good for ruguaythe country that gave his Hungarian parents sanctuary from itler.
Five years later, T C S Iberoamerica can't hire workers fast enough.
hen I visited its head office, people were working on computers in hall ays and stairwells.
(Rozman also oversees thirteen hundred employees n Brazil and twelve hundred in Chile.)
It turns out that many multina ionals like the idea of spreading out their risks and not having all their utsourcing done from India especially after one big U.S. bank nearly ad to shut down last year when a flood in Mumbai paralyzed its India ata center the same day a hurricane paralyzed its Florida operation.
And here is no risk of nuclear war with Pakistan in Uruguay, either.
When I first approached this big U.S. bank to outsource some of its ervices to Montevideo, instead of India," recalled Rozman, "the guy I as speaking with said, 'I don't even know where Montevideo is.'
So I aid to him, That's the point!'"
Another factor, added Rozman, was that ultinationals that were depending on Indian firms alone to run their ack rooms twenty-four hours a day were getting the third team for eight ours, since the best Indian engineers didn't want to work the late-night hiftthe heart of America's day.
By creating an outsourcing center in ontevideo, which is just one hour ahead of New York, Tata could offer ts clients its best Indian engineers during India's day (America's night) nd its best Uruguayan engineers during America's day (India's night).
OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ost employees here are Uruguayans, but there are also lots of Indians ent over by Tata.
It produces both a culture shockMontevideo doesn't ave one Indian restaurantand a cultural cacophony.
The firm runs n strict Tata principles, as if it were in Mumbai, so to see Uruguayans retending to be Indians serving Americans is quite a scene.
Rosina armion, twenty-seven, an Uruguayan manager, explained, "Our cus omers expect us to behave like Indians, to react the same way."
hatever can be done .
In today's world, having an Indian com any led by a Hungarian-Uruguayan C E O , servicing American banks ith Montevidean engineers managed by Indian technologists who have earned to eat Uruguayan veggie is just the new normal.
ne day in the spring of 2006 I was interviewing B. Ramalinga Raju, hairman of Satyam Computer Services, one of India's top firms doing utsourced work from America, and he mentioned in passing how atyam had just started outsourcing some of its American work to Indian illages.
The outsourcee has become the outsourcer!
Why not?
Raju ex lained: "We told ourselves: If business process outsourcing can be done rom cities in India to support cities in the developed world, why can't it e done by villages in India to support cities in India?
Things like pro essing employee records can be done from anywhere, so there is no rea on they can't be done from a village."
Satyam began with two villages a ear ago and plans to scale up to 150.
There is enough bandwidth now, ven reaching big Indian villages, to parcel out this work, and the vil agers are very eager.
"The attrition level is low, and the commitment lev ls high," Raju said.
"It is a way of breathing economic life into villages."
n the fall of 2006,1 visited South Sioux City, Nebraska, where I met oug Palmer.
He and his partner, Pat Boeshart, make insulated concrete orms for buildings.
The traditional way to insulate concrete with foam is to ake the foam and then truck it around the country to building sites to be ttached to concrete.
Their company, Lite-Form, found a South Korean achine that, when combined with devices added by his firm, can make he foam and concrete together on site, saving big dollars in trucking.
oday, the South Sioux City company imports these machines from South orea, attaches its devices, and exports them to Kuwait.
His company has n Arabic brochure that tells Kuwaitis how to use the device.
The brochure  H E W O R L D IS F L A T as produced by a local ad agency owned by the Winnebago Indian tribe f Nebraska.
The agency was started by the tribe's economic development orporation, in an effort to diversify from its gambling casino called WinnaVegas."
You read this right: Plains Indians publishing Arabic rochures for Nebraskans who are importing machinery from Koreans to e customized by a South Sioux City company for customers in Kuwait.
he old left thinks free trade is something that benefits only multina ionals.
In fact, free trade is critical for small businesses and individuals, ho can now act multinationally.
"Protectionism scares us," said Palmer, hose company has twenty-eight employees.
"If we put up a moat and eep doing what we're doing, thinking we're the smartest in the world, e're going to die.
We have to have thatflexibilityto barter and trade."
few weeks later, in Silicon Valley, I met Arijit Sengupta, a young ndian American educated at Stanford and Harvard Business School, hose company, BeyondCore, developed a software algorithm to be able o detect and reduce errors in outsourced back-office work.
When I met r. Sengupta, he handed me a card with his logo, which, he explained, as designed by a graphic artist he found online in Romania through a eb site that brings together freelancers from all over the world.
He put is need for a design out for bid on the site, got a bunch of proposals from rgentina, India, Italy, Malaysia, New Zealand, Romania, Ukraine, ruguay, and the United States, chose the best one, and a few hundred ollars and a few days later had his own corporate logo for his business ard.
His database and Web server were drawn from free software, his log and part of his Web site were hosted for free by Google, and he had utsourced his marketing, sales support, and patent filings to Indian irms.
When I asked, "Where's your office?"
he held up his BlackBerry, hich took calls forwarded from phone numbers he set up in India, oston, and Palo Alto.
At the time, he and his seven workers already had ne Fortune 500 client.
"When I started this company I never had to hink about geography," he said.
"All I had to think about was: Where as the best resource to get something done?
What you need are the big deas.
That is the tough thing to come up with."
Sengupta had a great ense of everything that could be done, and he was doing it to create his wn global small business from scratch.
OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E emember: Small business is the engine of employment, and this latter world is clearly igniting a new era for small businesses to dream, reate, and sellno matter how small they are.
Joel Cawley of IBM told e about a young man he knew who thought it would be a great idea to ave colored iPod earphones, instead of just the all-white ones.
He went nline to Alibaba.com, an English-language Web site that helps small nd medium-size businesses contract with traders, sellers, and manufac urers globally.
On Alibaba, he found someone in China to design the arphones and someone else to produce them.
He then contracted with mazon.com to serve as his logistics, merchandising, and fulfillment latform.
"With very little capital," said Cawley, "he started a global sup ly chain with global fulfillment."
hat all these stories tell me is that, thanks to the flat-world platform, e are seeing the emergence of collaborative, build-your-own business odels that are unprecedented in historyand that whatever can be one is being done.
ule #2: This is an outgrowth of rule #1.
Because we are in a world where hatever can be done will be done, the most important competition today s between you and your own imagination.
es, of course, countries still compete with one another and always will.
es, of course, companies still compete with one another and always ill.
But what is unique about the flat world is the degree to which ndividuals, or small groups, can now act and compete globally.
When ndividuals can upload and globalize their own ideas, products, or ervices as individualsthen what they imagine matters more than ver.
And that is why the biggest competition going forward is between ou and your own imagination, because you can now do so much more n your own.
I got this idea from B. Ramalinga Raju, who told me, Getting the most out of your own imagination, or your employees'," is oing to be the defining feature of our age.
The countries and companies hat will thrive will be those which create an environment where their eople can stretch their imaginations to the horizon and beyond, and urn their visions into new products and services.
What the above stories  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ave in common is that the products and services provided by these in ividualsor by the companies they starteddid not previously exist.
hese entrepreneurs didn't simply adapt or improve someone else's idea nd make it cheaper or better.
No.
Most of them were just competing ith themselves, with their own imagination, about what could be done.
nd they acted on their own imagination before someone else imagined he same thing and acted before them.
hat is one reason we need to ignore those in America who would ad ocate putting up higher walls of protectionism today or restricting free rade.
It would be exactly the wrong thing at the wrong time for the rong country.
I tell people now: "I've rethought my position on trade.
am no longer a free-trader.
No, sir.
I am now a radical free-trader."
ecause if whatever can be done will be done, then the society that is ost open to what is being done anywhere in the world, most open to the ompetition, while also being most inviting of its own people and immi rants to imagine and do whatever can be done, is the society that will hrive the most.
nd this also explains why I am still optimistic about America's po ential in a flat world.
I am optimistic because we still have more of the bove attributes than any other country, and we must never tamper with hem.
Washington, D.C., may be brain-dead.
The Democratic and epublican parties may be brain-dead.
Congress may be brain-dead ut America's free, open, imagine-anything-you-want, flexible economy nd society are still very much alive out there.
I see this every day when I ravel the country outside Washington.
That free, open, and competitive nvironment is not only what makes us unique; it is what saves us from ur brain-dead politicians.
The society which has the least resistance to the uninterrupted flow f ideas, diversity, concepts, and competitive signals wins," said Nandan ilekani.
"And the society that has the efficiencies to translate whatever an be done quicklyfrom idea to marketalso wins."
hat still sounds like America to me.
So pardon me if I resist those ho want to put up walls.
And pardon me also when I hear people say, Britain dominated the nineteenth century, America dominated the wentieth century, and China will dominate the twenty-first century," OW OMPANIES COPE nd I respond, "Not so fast."
Maybe China will become the dominant conomic power in the twenty-first century, but maybe not.
I am not eady to cede the twenty-first century to China just yet.
We Americans ertainly are not going to dominate the twenty-first century by default or y resting on our laurels.
We have to work harder and smarter.
But we are ot automatically going to be roadkill for China, either.
In China they ensor Google, and censoring Google is a proxy for a lot of impediments nd restrictions to imagining and doing whatever can be done.
hat is why I like to joke that my grandmother in Minnesota used to it in her rocking chair by the fire during those cold Minnesota winters nd impart to me this bit of wisdom that guides me to this day: Tommy," she would say, "never cede a century to a country that cen ors Google."
ule #3: And the small shall act big ... One way small companies flour sh in the flat world is by learning to act really big.
Imagination is nec ssary, but not sufficient.
You have to be able to implement what you magine.
And the key to being small and acting big is being quick to take dvantage of all the new tools for collaboration to reach farther, faster, ider, and deeper.
can think of no better way to illustrate this rule than to tell the story of nother friend, Fadi Ghandour, the cofounder and C E O of Aramex, he first home-grown package delivery service in the Arab world and he first and only Arab company to be listed on the Nasdaq.
Originally rom Lebanon, Ghandour's family moved to Jordan in the 1960s, where is father, Ali, founded Royal Jordanian Airlines.
So Ghandour always ad the airline business in his genes.
Shortly after graduating from eorge Washington University in Washington, D.C., Ghandour re urned home and saw a niche business he thought he could develop: e and an American cofounder, William Kingson, raised some money nd in 1982 started a mini-Federal Express to do parcel delivery for the iddle East.
At the time, there was only one global parcel delivery ser ice operating in the Arab world: DHL, today owned by the German ostal service.
Ghandour's and Kingson's brainstorm was to approach  H E W O R L D IS F L A T merican companies, like Federal Express and Airborne Express, that id not have a Middle East presence and offer to become their local de ivery service, playing on the fact that an Arab company would know the egion and how to get around unpleasantries like Arab-Israeli clashes, the ran-Iraq war, and the American invasion of Iraq.
We said to them, 'Look, we don't compete with you locally in your ome market, but we understand the Middle East market, so why not ive your packages to us to deliver out here?'
" said Ghandour, in laying ut for me the whole Aramex story.
"We will be your Middle East delivery rm.
Why give them to your global competitor, like DHL?"
Airborne re ponded positively, and Ghandour used that to build his own business nd then buy up or partner with small delivery firms from Egypt to Turkey o Saudi Arabia and later all the way over to India, Pakistan, and Iran reating his own regional network.
Airborne did not have the money that ederal Express was investing in setting up its own operations in every re ion of the globe, so it created an alliance, bringing together some forty egional delivery companies, like Aramex, into a virtual global network.
hat Airborne's partners got was something none of them could individ ally afford to build at the timea global geographic presence and a omputerized package tracking and tracing system to compete with that f a FedEx or DHL.
irborne "made their online computerized tracking and tracing sys em available to all its partners, so there was a unified language and set of uality standards for how everyone in the Airborne alliance would de iver and track and trace packages," explained Ghandour.
With his com any headquartered in Amman, Jordan, Ghandour tapped into the irborne system by leasing a data line that was connected from Amman ll the way to Airborne's big mainframe computer in its headquarters n Seattle.
Through dumb terminals back in the Middle East, Aramex racked and traced its packages using Airborne's back room.
Aramex, in act, was the earliest adopter of the Airborne system.
Once Ghandour's ordanian employees got up to speed on it, Airborne hired them to go round the world to install systems and train the other alliance partners.
o these Jordanians, all of whom spoke English, went off to places like weden and the Far East and taught the Airborne methods of tracking OW C O M P A N I E S OPE nd tracing.
Eventually, Airborne bought 9 percent of Aramex to cement he relationship.
he arrangement worked well for everyone, and Aramex came to ominate the parcel delivery market in the Arab world, so well that in 997, Ghandour decided to take the company public on Broadway, also nown as the Nasdaq.
Aramex continued to grow into a nearly $200million-a-year company, with thirty-two hundred employeesand with ut any big government contracts.
Its business was built for and with the rivate sector, highly unusual in the Arab world.
Because of the dot-com oom, which deflected interest from brick-and-mortar companies like ramex, and then the dot-com bust, which knocked out the Nasdaq, ramex's stock price never really took off.
Thinking that the market sim ly did not appreciate its value, Ghandour, along with a private equity irm from Dubai, bought the company back from its shareholders in arly 2002. nbeknownst to Ghandour, this move coincided with the flattening f the world.
He suddenly discovered that not only could he do new hings, but he had to do new things he had never imagined doing before.
e first felt the world going flat in 2003, when Airborne got bought out y DHL.
Airborne announced that as of January 1, 2004, its tracking and racing system would no longer be available to its former alliance part ers.
See you later.
Good luck on your own.
hile the flattening of the world enabled Airborne, the big guy, to get latter, it allowed Ghandour, the little guy, to step up and replace it.
"The inute Airborne announced that it was being bought and dissolving the lliance," said Ghandour, "I called a meeting in London of all the major artners in the group, and the first thing we did was found a new alliance."
ut Ghandour also came with a proposal: "I told them that Aramex was eveloping the software in Jordan to replace the Airborne tracking and racing system, and I promised everyone there that our system would be p and running before Airborne switched theirs off."
handour in effect told them that the mouse would replace the ele hant.
Not only would his relatively small company provide the same ackroom support out of Amman that Airborne had provided out of eattle with its big mainframe, but he would also find more global part-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ers to fill in the holes in the alliance left by Airborne's departure.
To do his, he told the prospective partners that he would hire Jordanian pro essionals to manage all the alliance's back-office needs at a fraction f the cost they were paying to have it all done from Europe or America.
I am not the largest company in the group," said Ghandour, who is ow in his midforties and still full of energy, "but I took leadership.
My erman partners were a $1.2 billion company, but they could not react s fast."
ow could he move so quickly?
The triple convergence.
irst of all, a young generation of Jordanian software and industrial ngineers had just come of age and walked out onto the level playing ield.
They found that all the collaborative tools they needed to act big ere as available to them as to Airborne's employees in Seattle.
It was just  question of having the energy and imagination to adopt these tools and ut them to good use.
The key for us," said Ghandour, "was to come up with the technol gy and immediately replace the Airborne technology, because without nline, real-time tracking and tracing, you can't compete with the big oys.
With our own software engineers, we produced a Web-based track ng and tracing and shipment management system."
anaging the back room for all the alliance partners through the nternet was actually much more efficient than plugging everyone into irborne's mainframe back in Seattle, which was very centralized and ad already been struggling to adapt to the new Web architecture.
With he Web, said Ghandour, every employee in every alliance company ould access the Aramex tracking and tracing system through smart PC erminals or handheld devices, using the Internet and wireless.
A couple f months after making his proposal in London, Ghandour brought all he would-be partners together in Amman to show them the proprietary ystem that Aramex was developing and to meet some of his Jordanian oftware professionals and industrial engineers.
(Some of the program ing was being done in-house at Aramex and some was outsourced.
utsourcing meant Aramex too could tap the best brains.)
The partners iked it, and thus the Global Distribution Alliance was bornwith ramex providing the back room from the backwater of Amman, where OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E awrence of Arabia once prowled, replacing Airborne, which was lo ated just down the highway from Microsoft and Bill Gates.
nother reason Ghandour could replace Airborne so quickly, he ex lained, was that he was not stuck with any "legacy" system that he had o adapt.
"I could go right to the Internet and use the latest technologies," e said.
"The Web enabled me to act big and replicate a massive tech ology that the big guys had invested millions in, at a fraction of the  o s t .
From a cost perspective, for me as a small guy, it was i d e a l .
I new the world was flat.
All my preaching to our employees as the C E O as that we can compete, we can have a niche, the rules of the game are hanging, you don't need to be a giant, you can find a niche, and tech ology will enable us to compete with the big boys."
hen January 2004 rolled around and Airborne began switching off ts system, Aramex was up and running for a seamless handoff.
And be ause Aramex was able to run its new system off an Internet platform, ith software designed primarily by lower-cost Jordanian programmers, nstallation of the new system took place virtually, without Aramex hav ng to send its engineers to train any of the alliance partners.
Each part er company could build its own client base over the Internet through he Aramex system, do its own tracking and tracing, and be part of the ew virtual global air freight network.
So now we are managing this global network, with forty alliance part ers, and we cover every geographic area in the world," said Ghandour.
We saved so much money... With our Web-based system all you eeded was a browser and a password to get into the Aramex network, and uddenly you're inside a global shipment management system."
Aramex rained many of the employees of the other alliance companies how to se its system by using various online channels, including voice over the nternet, online chatting, and other virtual training tools available on ramex's intranetmaking the training incredibly cheap.
ike UPS, Aramex has quickly moved into insourcing.
Arab and for ign banks in the Middle East have outsourced the delivery of their redit cards to Aramex; mobile phone companies are using Aramex deliverymen to collect bills on their behalf, with the deliverymen just scan ing the customer's credit card and then issuing a receipt.
(Aramex may  H E W O R L D IS F L A T e high-tech, but it has not shrunk from using donkeys to cross military oadblocks to deliver packages in the West Bank when Israeli-Palestinian lashes have closed roads.)
We are a very flat organization," Ghandour explained.
"This is not tra itional, because Arab institutions in the private sector tend to look like the overnmentsvery hierarchal and patriarchal.
That is not how Aramex orks.
There are no more than two to three layers between me and any ne in the company.
Every single knowledge worker in this organization as a computer with e-mail and Internet access.
Right here from your omputer I can access my intranet and see exactly what is happening in he organization without my senior people having to report to me."
n sum, Fadi Ghandour took advantage of several new forms of ollaborationsupply-chaining, outsourcing, insourcing, and all the teroidsto make his little $200-million-a-year company very big.
Or, as e put it with a smile, "I was big locally and small internationallyand  reversed that."
ule #4: And the big shall act small... One way that big companies learn o flourish in the flat world is by learning how to act really small by en bling their customers to act really big.
oward Schultz, the founder and chairman of Starbucks, says that tarbucks estimates that it is possible to make nineteen thousand varia ions of coffee on the basis of the menus posted at any Starbucks outlet.
hat Starbucks did, in other words, was make its customers its drink de igners and allow them to customize their drinks to their exact specifica ions.
Starbucks never thought of offering soy milk, Schultz told me, ntil store managers started to get bombarded with demands for it from ustomers, to the point where they were going to the grocery store across he street in the middle of the day to buy cartons of soy milk.
Starbucks earned from its customers, and today some 8 percent of all the drinks hat Starbucks sells include soy milk.
"We didn't dream up the different oncoctions with soy milk," said Schultz, "the customers did."
Starbucks ust collaborated with them.
The smartest big companies clearly under tand that the triple convergence allows them to collaborate with their OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ustomers in a totally new fashionand, by doing so, to act really small.
he way that big companies act small is not by targeting each individual onsumer and trying to serve that customer individually.
That would be mpossible and impossibly expensive.
They do it by making their busi ess, as much as possible, into a buffet.
These companies create a plat orm that allows individual customers to serve themselves in their own ay, at their own pace, in their own time, according to their own tastes.
hey are actually making their customers their employees and having hem pay the company for that pleasure at the same time!
ne of those big companies that have learned to act small in this way s E Trade, the online bank and brokerage house.
It did so, explained itchell H. Caplan, the C E O of E Trade as well as a friend and neigh or, by recognizing that behind all the hoopla around the dot-com boom nd bust, something very important was happening.
"Some people hought the Internet was going to revolutionize everything in the world ith no limitsit was going to cure the common cold," said Caplan.
ure, it was hype, and it led to crazy valuations and expectations, which ventually came crashing down.
But meanwhile, with much less fanfare, he Internet was creating "a whole new distribution platform for compa ies to reach consumers in a whole new way and for consumers to reach our company in a whole new way," Caplan said.
"While we were sleep ng, my mom figured out how to use e-mail and connect with the kids.
y kids were instant-messaging all their friends.
My mom figured out ow to go online and check her E T r a d e balances."
ompanies that were paying attention understood they were witness ng the birth of the "self-directed consumer," because the Internet and all he other tools of the flat world had created a means for every consumer o customize exactly the price, experience, and service he or she wanted.
ig companies that could adapt their technology and business processes o empower this self-directed consumer could act very small by enabling heir customers to act very big.
They could make the consumer feel that very product or service was being tailored for his or her specific needs nd desires, when in fact all that the company was doing was creating a igital buffet for them to serve themselves.
n the financial services industry, this constituted a profound change  H E W O R L D IS F L A T n approach.
Historically, financial services were dominated by large anks, large brokerage houses, and large insurance companies that told ou what you were getting, how you were getting it, when and where you ere getting it, and the price you had to pay for it.
Customers reacted to hese big companies with emotions ranging from apathy to distaste.
But f I didn't like the way my bank was treating me, I didn't have any real hoice.
Then the world was flattened and the Internet came along.
onsumers started to feel that they could have more control, and the ore they adapted their buying habits to the Internet, the more compa iesfrom booksellers to financial serviceshad to adapt and offer hem the tools to be in control.
Sure, the Internet stocks blew up when the bubble burst," said aplan, whose own company's stock price took a big dip in that market torm, "but underneath, consumers were getting a taste of power, and nce they tasted it, things went from companies being in control of con umers' behavior to consumers being in control of companies' behavior.
he rules of engagement changed, and if you did not respond and offer ustomers what they wanted, someone else would, and you would be ead."
Where once the financial services companies acted big, now they trove to act small and to enable the consumer to act big.
"Companies ho prosper today," argued Caplan, "are the ones who understand the elf-directed consumer."
For E Trade, that meant thinking of the com any not as a collection of individual financial servicesa bank, a bro erage, and a lending businessbut as an integrated financial experience hat could serve the most self-directed financial consumers.
"The selfdirected consumer wanted one-stop financial shopping," said Caplan.
When they came to our site they wanted everything integrated, with hem in control.
Only recently, though, did we have the technology to eally integrate all our three businessesbanking, lending, and broker geand pull them together in a way that didn't just deliver the price, ot just the service, but the total experience they wanted."
f you came to the E*Trade site just three or four years ago, you would ee your brokerage account on one screen page and your lending on an ther.
Today, said Caplan, "On one page you can now see exactly where ou stand in terms of your brokerage in real time, including your buying OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ower, and you see your bank account and the scheduled payments for our loanswhat is pending, what is the balance on your home mort age, and [what is your] line of creditand you have the ability to move eamlessly between all three to maximize the benefit of your cash."
hile Fadi Ghandour coped with the triple convergence by taking a mall company and devising a strategy to make it act very big, Mitchell aplan survived by taking a big company and making it act very small so hat his customers could act very big.
ule # 5 : The best companies are the best collaborators.
In the flat world, ore and more business will be done through collaborations within and etween companies, for a very simple reason: The next layers of value cre tionwhether in technology, marketing, biomedicine, or manufactur ngare becoming so complex that no single firm or department is going o be able to master them alone.
What we are seeing in so many different fields," said Joel Cawley, the ead of IBM's strategic planning unit, "is that the next layers of innova ion involve the intersection of very advanced specialties.
The cutting dge of technical innovation in every field is increasingly specialized."
In ost cases, your own company's or your own department's specialization s going to be applicable to only a very small piece of any meaningful usiness or social challenge.
"Therefore, to come up with any valuable ew breakthrough, you have to be able to combine more and more of hese increasingly granular specialties.
That is why collaboration is so im ortant," Cawley said.
So you might find that a pharmaceutical company as invented a new stent that allows it to dispense a whole new class of rugs that a biomedical company has been working on, and the real reakthroughwhere the real profit is created for both is in their col aboration in getting the breakthrough drugs from one firm together with he breakthrough delivery system from another.
r take a more colorful example: video games.
Game makers have ong been commissioning special music to go with games.
They eventu lly discovered that when they combined the right music with the right ame they not only sold many, many more copies of that game, but they  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ould spin off the music for sale on C D or download as well.
So some big ame companies have recently started their own music divisions, and ome artists have decided that they have a better chance of getting their usic heard by launching it with a new digital game than on the radio.
s I noted earlier, many of the new middle jobs will go to people who re great synthesizersbecause the more the flattening of the world con ects all the knowledge pools together, the more new specialties will be pawned, and the more innovation will come from putting these special ies together in new and different combinations.
And the more that is rue, the more good management, too, will be about nurturing synthesis nd collaboration within your companyat a much deeper level.
In the ime magazine cover story (October 24, 2005) on Steve Jobs and the pple video iPod, one paragraph jumped out at me.
It said: "Apple em loyees talk incessantly about what they call 'deep collaboration' or cross-pollination' or 'concurrent engineering.'
Essentially it means that roducts don't pass from team to team.
There aren't discrete, sequential evelopment stages.
Instead, it's simultaneous and organic.
Products get orked on in parallel by all departments at once design, hardware, soft arein endless rounds of interdisciplinary design reviews.
Managers lsewhere boast about what little time they waste in meetings; Apple is ig on them and proud of it.
'The historical way of developing products ust doesn't work when you're as ambitious as we are,' says [Jonathan] Ive, head of design], an affable, bear-like Brit.
'When the challenges are that omplex, you have to develop a product in a more collaborative, inte rated way.'
" erhaps the best way to illustrate this paradigm shift is to show how a ery traditional manufacturerRolls-Roycehas adapted to it.
When ou hear the word "Rolls-Royce," what immediately comes to mind is a hiny handmade car, with a uniformed chauffeur sitting in the driver's eat and a perfectly tailored couple in the back on their way to Ascot or imbledon.
Rolls-Royce, the quintessential stodgy British company, ight?
What if I told you, though, that Rolls-Royce doesn't even make ars anymore (that business was sold in 1972 and the brand was licensed o B M W in 1998), that 50 percent of its income comes from services, nd that in 1990 all of its employees were in Great Britain and today 40 OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ercent are based outside of the United Kingdom, integrated into a lobal operation that stretches from China to Singapore to India to Italy o Spain to Germany to Japan and up to Scandinavia?
o, this is not your father's Rolls-Royce.
Quite a long time ago we said, 'We cannot be just a U.K. company,' " ir John Rose, chief executive of Rolls-Royce PLC, told me in an inter iew while we were both visiting China.
"The U.K. is a tiny market.
In he late 1980s, 60 percent of our business was defense [particularly jet ngines] and our primary customer was Her Majesty's government.
But e needed to become a world player, and if we were going to do that we ad to recognize that the biggest customer in everything we could do was he U.S., and we had to be successful in nondefense markets.
So we be ame a technology company [specializing in] power systems."
Today olls-Royce's core competency is making gas turbines for civilian and ilitary airplanes, for helicopters, for ships, and for the oil and gas and ower-generation industries.
olls-Royce has customers now in 120 countries and employs around hirty-five thousand people, but only twenty-one thousand are located in he United Kingdom, with the rest part of a global network of research, ervice, and manufacturing workers.
Half of Rolls-Royce's revenue is ow generated by businesses outside the United Kingdom.
"In the U.K. e are thought of as a British company," said Rose, "but in Germany we re a German company.
In America we are an American company, in ingapore we are a Singaporean companyyou have to be in order to e close to the customer but also to the suppliers, employees, and com unities in which we operate."
Today Rolls-Royce employs people of bout fifty nationalities in fifty countries speaking about fifty languages.
t outsources and offshores about 75 percent of its components to its lobal supply chain.
"The 25 percent that we make are the differentiat ng elements," said Rose.
"These are the hot end of the engine, the tur ines, the compressors and fans and the alloys, and the aerodynamics of ow they are made.
A turbine blade is grown from a single crystal in a acuum furnace from a proprietary alloy, with a very complex cooling ystem.
This very-high-value-added manufacturing is one of our core ompetencies."
In short, said Rose, "We still own the key technologies,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T e own the ability to identify and define what product is required by our ustomers, we own the ability to integrate the latest science into making hese products, we own the route to the market for these products, and e own the ability to collect and understand the data generated by those ustomers using our products, enabling us to support that product while n service and constantly add value."
ut outside of these core areas, Rolls-Royce has adopted a much ore horizontal approach to outsourcing noncore components to sup liers anywhere in the world, and to seeking out IQ far beyond the ritish Isles.
The sun may have set on the British Empire, and it used to et on the old Rolls-Royce.
But it never sets on the new Rolls-Royce.
To roduce breakthroughs in the power-generation business today, the com any has to meld together the insights of many more specialists from round the world, explained Rose.
And to be able to commercialize the ext energy frontierfuel cell technologywill require that even more.
One of the core competencies of the business today is partnering," said ose.
"We partner on products and on service provisions, we partner with niversities and with other participants in our industry.
You have to be dis iplined about what they can provide and what we can sensibly under ake .
There is a market in R & D and a market in suppliers and a market n products, and you need to have a structure that responds to all of them."
decade ago, he added, "We did 98 percent of our research and tech ology in the U.K. and now we do less than 40 percent in the U.K. Now e do it as well in the U.S., Germany, India, Scandinavia, Japan, ingapore, Spain, and Italy.
We now recruit from a much more interna ional group of universities to anticipate the mix of skills and nationalities e will want in ten or fifteen years."
hen Rolls-Royce was a U.K.-centric company, he added, it was very ertically organized.
"But we had to flatten ourselves," said Rose, as more nd more markets opened worldwide that Rolls-Royce could sell into nd from which it could extract knowledge.
nd what does the future hold?
his approach to change that Rolls-Royce has perfected in response o the flattening of the world is going to become the standard for more nd more new start-up companies.
If you were to approach venture cap- OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E tal firms in Silicon Valley today and tell them that you wanted to start a ew company but refused to outsource or offshore anything, they would how you the door immediately.
Venture capitalists today want to know rom day one that your start-up is going to take advantage of the triple onvergence to collaborate with the smartest, most efficient people you an find anywhere in the world.
Which is why in the flat world, more nd more companies are now being born global.
In the old days," said Vivek Paul, the Wipro president, "when you tarted a company, you might say to yourself, 'Boy, in twenty years, I hope e will be a multinational company.'
Today, you say to yourself that on ay two I will be a multinational.
Today, there are thirty-person compa ies starting out with twenty employees in Silicon Valley and ten in ndia .
And if you are a multiproduct company, you are probably going o have some manufacturing relationships in Malaysia and China, some esign in Taiwan, some customer support in India and the Philippines, nd possibly some engineering in Russia and the U.S." These are the socalled micromultinationals, and they are the wave of the future.
oday, your first management job out of business school could be elding the specialties of a knowledge team that is one-third in India, ne-third in China, and a sixth each in Palo Alto and Boston.
That takes  very special kind of skill, and it is going to be much in demand in the lat world.
ule #6: In a flat world, the best companies stay healthy by getting regular hest X-rays and then selling the results to their clients.
ecause niche businesses can get turned into vanilla commodity busi esses faster than ever in a flat world, the best companies today really do et chest X-rays regularlyto constantly identify and strengthen their iches and outsource the stuff that is not very differentiating.
What do I ean by chest X-rays?
Let me introduce Laurie Tropiano, IBM's vice resident for business consulting services, who is what I would call a cor orate radiologist.
What Tropiano and her team at IBM do is basically -ray your company and break down every component of your business nd then put it up on a wall-size screen so you can study your corporate  H E W O R L D IS F L A T keleton.
Every department, every function, is broken out and put in a ox and identified as to whether it is a cost for the company or a source f income, or a little of both, and whether it is a unique core competency f the company or some vanilla function that anyone else could do  ossibly cheaper and better.
A typical company has forty tofiftycomponents," Tropiano explained o me one day at IBM, as she displayed a corporate skeleton up on her creen, "so what we do is identify and isolate these forty to fifty compo ents and then sit down and ask [the company], 'How much money are ou spending in each component?
Where are you best in class?
Where re you differentiated?
What are the totally nondifferentiated components f your business?
Where do you think you have capabilities but are not ure you are ever going to be great there because you'd have to put more oney in than you want?'
" hen you are done, said Tropiano, you basically have an X-ray of the ompany, identifying four or five "hot spots."
One or two might be core ompetencies; others might be skills that the company wasn't fully aware hat it even had and that should be built up.
Other hot spots on the X-ray, hough, might be components where five different departments are dupli ating the same functions or services that others outside the company ould do better and more cheaply and so should be outsourcedprovided here is still a savings to be made once all the costs and disruptions of out ourcing are taken into account.
So you go look at this [X-ray] and say, 1 have these areas here that are oing to be really hot and core,' " says Tropiano, "and then let go of the hings that you can outsource, and free up those funds and focus on the rojects that could one day be part of your core competency.
For the av rage company, you are doing well if 25 percent is core competency and trategic and really differentiating, and the rest you may continue to do nd try to improve or you may outsource."
first got interested in this phenomenon when an Internet business ews headline caught my eye: "HP bags $150 million India bank con ract."
The story on Computerworld.com (February 25, 2004) quoted a tatement by HP saying that it had inked a ten-year outsourcing contract ith the Bank of India in Mumbai.
The $150 million contract was the OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E argest ever won by HP Services in the Asia-Pacific region, according to atarajan Sundaram, head of marketing for HP Services India.
The deal alled for HP to implement and manage a core banking system across 750 ank of India branches.
"This is the first time we at HP are looking at the utsourcing of the core banking function in the Asia-Pacific region," said undaram.
Several multinational companies competed for the contract, ncluding IBM.
Under the contract, HP would take charge of data ware ousing and document-imaging technology, telebanking, Internet bank ng, and automated teller machines for the whole bank chain.
ther stories explained that the Bank of India had been facing increas ng competition from both public- and private-sector banks and multina ional corporations.
It realized that it needed to adopt Web-based banking, tandardize and upgrade its computer systems, lower its transaction costs, nd generally become more customer-friendly.
So it did what any other ultinational would doit gave itself a chest X-ray and decided to out ource all the functions it did not believe were part of its core competency r that it simply did not have the internal skills to do at the highest level.
till, when the Bank of India decides to outsource its back room to an merican-owned computer company, well, that just seemed too weird or words.
"Run that by me again," I said, rubbing my eyes.
"HP, the folks  call when my printer breaks, won the outsourcing contract for manag ng the back room of India's 750-branch state-owned bank?
What in the orld does Hewlett-Packard know about running the backroom systems f an Indian bank?"
ut of curiosity, I decided to visit the HP headquarters in Palo Alto to ind out.
There, I met Maureen Conway, HP's vice president for emerg ng market solutions, and put the above question directly to her.
How did we think we could take our internal capabilities and make hem good for other people?"
she answered rhetorically.
In brief, she ex lained, HP is constantly hosting customer visits, where its corporate lients come to its headquarters and see the innovations that HP has rought to managing its own information systems.
Many of those cus omers go away intrigued at how this big company has adapted itself to the lat world.
How, they ask, did HP, which once had eighty-seven different upply chains each managed vertically and independently, with its own  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ierarchy of managers and back-office supportcompress them into just ive supply chains that manage $50 billion in business, and in which unctions like accounting, billing, and human resources are handled hrough a companywide system?
What computers and business processes id HP install to consolidate all this efficiently?
HP, which does business n 178 countries, used to handle all its accounts payable and receivable or each individual country in that country.
It was totally chopped up.
Just n the last couple of years, HP created three transaction-processing ubsin Bangalore, Barcelona, and Guadalajarawith uniform stan ards and special work flow software that allowed HP offices in all 178 ountries to process all billing functions through these three hubs.
eeing the reaction of its customers to its own internal operations, HP aid one day, "Hey, why don't we commercialize this?"
Said Conway, That became the nucleus of our business process outsourcing ser ice .
We were doing our own chest X-rays and discovered we had as ets that other people cared about, and that is a business."
n other words, the flattening of the world was both the disease and he cure for the Bank of India.
It clearly could not keep up with its com etitors in the flattening banking environment of India, and, at the same ime, it was able to get a chest X-ray and then outsource to HP all those hings that it no longer made sense to do itself.
And HP, having done its wn chest X-ray, discovered that it was carrying a whole new consulting usiness inside its breast.
Sure, most of the work for the Bank of India will e done by HP employees in India or Bank of India employees who will ctually join HP.
But some of the profits will find their way back to the other ship in Palo Alto, which will be supporting the whole operation hrough its global knowledge supply chain.
ost of HP's revenues today come from outside the United States.
ut the core HP knowledge and infrastructure teams who can put to ether the processes that win those contractslike running the back oom of the Bank of India are still in the United States.
The ability to dream is here, more than in other parts of the world," aid Conway.
"The nucleus of creativity is here, not because people are marterit is the environment, the freedom of thought.
The dream ma hine is still here."
OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E ule #7: The best companies outsource to win, not to shrink.
They out ource to innovate faster and more cheaply in order to grow larger, gain arket share, and hire more and different specialistsnot to save money y firing more people.
s noted earlier, Dov Seidman runs LRN, a business that provides on ine legal, compliance, and ethics education to employees of global ompanies and helps executives and board members manage corporate overnance responsibilities.
We were having lunch in the fall of 2004 hen Seidman casually mentioned that he had recently signed an out ourcing contract with the Indian consulting firm MindTree.
Why are you cutting costs?"
I asked him.
I am outsourcing to win, not to save money," Seidman answered.
Go to our Web site.
I currently have over thirty job openings, and these re knowledge jobs.
We're expanding.
We're hiring.
I am adding people nd creating new processes."
eidman's experience is what most outsourcing is actually about ompanies outsourcing to acquire knowledge talent to grow their busi ess faster, not simply to cut costs and cut back.
Seidman's company is a eader in one of those completely new industries that just appeared in he flat world helping multinationals foster an ethical corporate cul ure around an employee base spread all over the world.
Although LRN s a BE companyfounded ten years before Enron exploded demand or its services surged in the PE erapost-Enron.
In the wake of the col apse of Enron and other corporate governance scandals, a lot more ompanies became interested in what LRN was offeringonline pro rams for companies to forge common expectations and understandings f their legal and ethical responsibilities, from the boardroom to the fac ory floor.
When companies sign up with LRN, their employees are iven an online education, including tests that cover everything from our company's code of conduct to when you are allowed to accept a gift o what you need to think about before hitting Send on an e-mail to what onstitutes a bribe of a foreign official.
s the corporate governance issue began to mushroom in the early 000s, Seidman realized that his customers, much like E Trade's eus-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T omers, would need a more integrated platform.
While it was great that e was educating their employees with one online curriculum and ad ising boards on ethics issues with another, he knew that company exec tives would want a one-stop Web-based interface where they could et a handle on all the governance and ethics issues facing their organiza ionswhether it was employee education, the reporting of any anomalous ehavior, stewardship of a hard-earned corporate reputation, or govern ent complianceand where they could get immediate visibility into here their company stood.
o Seidman faced a double challenge.
He needed to do two things at nce: keep growing his market share in the online compliance educa ion industry, and design a whole new integrated platform for the com anies he was already working with, one that would require a real echnological leap.
It was when faced with this challenge that he de ided to enlist MindTree, the Indian consulting firm, in an outsourced elationship that offered him about five well-qualified software engineers or the price of one in America.
Look," said Seidman, "when things are on sale, you tend to buy ore. MindTree offered a sale not on last season's closeout, but on topnotch software engineering talent that I would have been hard-pressed to ind elsewhere.
I needed to spend a lot of money defending and extend ng my core business and continue to take care of my customers, who ere working off my current programs.
And at the same time, I had to ake a giant leap to offer my customers what they were asking for next, hich was a much more robust and total online solution to all their thics, governance, and compliance questions.
If I don't meet their eeds, someone else will.
Partnering with MindTree allows me to basi ally have two teamsone team [mostly Americans] that is focused on efending and extending our core business, and the other team, includ ng our Indian consultants, focused on making our next strategic leap to row our business."
ince ethics is at the core of Seidman's Los Angeles-headquartered usiness, how he went about outsourcing was as important as the ulti ate results of the relationship.
Rather than announcing the MindTree artnership as a done deal, Seidman conducted an all-hands town-hall OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E eeting of his 170 or so employees to discuss the outsourcing he had in ind.
He laid out all the economic arguments, let his staff weigh in, and ave everyone a picture of which jobs would be needed in the future and ow people could prepare themselves to fit in.
"I needed to show my ompany that this is what it would take to win," he said.
ave no doubt, there are firms that do and will outsource good jobs ust to save money and disperse it to shareholders or management.
To hink that this is not happening or will not happen is beyond nave.
But irms that are using outsourcing primarily as a tool to cut costs, not enhance innovation and speed growth, are the minority, not the majority nd I would not want to own stock in any of them.
The best companies re finding ways to leverage the best of what is in India with the best f what is in North Dakota with the best of what is in Los Angeles.
In hat sense, the word "outsourcing" should really be retired.
The applicable word is really "sourcing."
That is what the flat world both enables and demands, and the companies that do sourcing right end up ith bigger market shares and more employees everywhere not smaller nd fewer.
This is about trying to get bigger faster, about how we make our next eap in less time with greater assurance of success," said Seidman of his decision to source critical areas of development of his new platform to indTree.
"It is not about cutting corners.
We have over two hundred lients all over the world now.
If I can grow this company the way that I want o, I will be able to hire even more people in all our current offices, promote ven more people, and give our current employees even more opportunities and more rewarding career pathsbecause LRN's agenda is going to be roader, more complex, and more global... We are in a very competitive pace.
This [decision to use outsourcing] is all about playing offense, not defense.
I am trying to run up the score before it's run up on me."
ule #8: HOW you do things as a company matters more today than ever.
draw this concept from Dov Seidman's book How.
Seidman's essential rgument is twofold: One reason that how you do business today is so uch more important is that most aspects of business in a flat world will  H E W O R L D IS F L A T e easily commoditized and copied.
To differentiate yourself from your ompetition, you can no longer rely on price and service, or even on best ractices.
Everyone will have those sooner or latereveryone who stays n business.
You will differentiate your company from the others by how ou do business.
After all, how much difference is there today among arget, Kmart, Wal-Mart, and Costco, or Nordstrom, Saks, and Nieman arcus?
In price, or basic store design and operations, not much.
he difference among them lies in "how they treat their colleagues, ustomers, suppliers, and investors," says Seidman.
"If your interactions ith others deliver a more meaningful customer experience, if you deal ore consistently, openly, and honestly with your suppliers and in estors, and more decently with your employees, you engender loyalty hat brings them all back and trust that enables greater collaboration.
hen it comes to conductthe howsthere is still tremendous varia ion in the marketplace.
And where variation exists, opportunity exists.
he tapestry of human behavior is so varied, so rich, so global that it pre ents a rare opportunitythe opportunity to not only outperform the ompetition but to outbehave the competition."
he other reason is that companies today are more transparentand heir customers more powerful.
When the world was round and full of alls, a boss would say to an employee, "Just get it done.
I don't care how, ust don't break the law."
And that boss could do that because it was very ifficult for anyone else to see inside his business.
Plausible deniability nd "don't ask/don't tell" ruled the day.
Companies were fortresses and ne-way communicators, and they had the power to define themselves hrough proxies marketers, advertisements, spokespeople, official state entswithout consumers being able to compare notes.
Companies ould differentiate themselves by simply hiring the best ad agency or rafting the best "message."
Not anymore.
Little guys and gals can now alk back in ways the whole world can hearby blogging or podcasting bout your company or by mocking your product on YouTube with a ideo that can be downloaded all over the world.
Companies used to be monologists," says Seidman.
"Now we are in  world of two-way dialogue.
When I want to go to a resort, or buy an ap liance, or read a book, I check the reader reviews, where consumers OW OMPANIES COPE ompare notes.
And I will put more trust in those than anything a com any says about itself.
Customers can not only talk back, they can look nto the very workings of your business and decide if you conduct your elf in a way they approve of.
In this world, your reputation will be the um total of all your conduct and interactions, which will now be so uch more measurable by outsiders."
onsumers' insights into the how of your business will affect not only ho comes in your door to shop but also who wants to collaborate with ou.
And in the flat world, your company's ability to inspire trust is every hing.
If your business partners are on the other side of the world, and rom a different culture, and if you and they have never met, the fact that ou've developed a reputation for behaving ethically is critical.
They will ive you the benefit of the doubt.
But you will have to earn that trust one interaction at a time," says Seidman.
You can't buy it from Hill & nowlton anymore.
"Before, you just needed to do the right things," eidman concludes.
"Now you need to do them the right way."
ule #9: When the world goes flatand you are feeling lattenedreach or a shovel and dig inside yourself.
Don't try to build walls.
oing to India gave me an inkling that the world was flat, but only when  went back to my roots and spoke to my friends from Minnesota did I ealize just how flat.
Some twenty-five years ago Jill and Ken Greer whose brother Bill I profiled earlier) started their own multimedia com any, Greer & Associates, which specialized in developing commercials or TV and doing commercial photography for retail catalogs.
They have uilt up a nice business in Minneapolis, with more than forty employees, ncluding graphic artists and Web designers, their own studio, and a mall stable of local and national clients.
As a midsize firm, Greer always ad to hustle for work, but over the years Ken always found a way to ake a good living.
n early April 2004, Ken and Jill came to Washington to spend a eekend for my wife's fiftieth birthday.
I could tell that Ken had a lot on is mind regarding his business.
We took a long walk one morning in ural Virginia.
I told him about the book I was writing, and he told me  H E W O R L D IS F L A T bout how his business was doing.
After a while, we realized that we were oth talking about the same thing: The world had grown flat, and it had appened so fast, and had affected his business so profoundly, that he as still wrestling with how to adjust.
It was clear to him that he was fac ng competition and pricing pressure of a type and degree that he had ever faced before.
Freelancers," said Greer, speaking about these independent con ractors as if they were a plague of locusts that suddenly had descended n his business, eating everything in sight.
"We are now competing gainst freelancers!
We never really competed against freelancers before.
ur competition used to be firms of similar size and capability.
We used o do similar things in somewhat different ways, and each firm was able o find a niche and make a living."
Today the dynamic is totally different, e said.
"Our competition is not only those firms we always used to com ete against.
Now we have to deal with giant firms, who have the capa ility to handle small, medium, and large jobs, and also with the solo ractitioners working out of their home offices, who [by making use of oday's technology and software] can theoretically do the same thing that  person sitting in our office can do.
What's the difference in output, rom our clients' point of view, between the giant company who hires a id designer and puts him in front of a computer, and our company that ires a kid designer and puts him in front of a computer, and the kid de igner with a computer in his own basement?
The technology and oftware are so empowering that it makes us all look the same.
In the last onth we have lost three jobs to freelance solo practitioners who used to ork for good companies and have experience and then just went out on heir own.
Our clients all said the same thing to us: Tour firm was really ualified.
John was very qualified.
John was cheaper.'
We used to feel bad osing to another firm, but now we are losing to another personl" ow did this change happen so fast?
I asked.
big part of their business is photographyshooting both products nd models for catalogs, Greer explained.
For twenty-five years, the way he business worked was that Greer & Associates would get an assign ent.
The client would tell Greer exactly what sort of shot he was look ng for and would "trust" the Greer team to come up with the right OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E mage.
Like all commercial photographers, Greer would use a Polaroid amera to take a picture of the model or product he was shooting, to see f his creative instinct was right, and then shoot with real film.
Once the ictures were taken, Greer would send the film out to a photo lab to be eveloped and color-separated.
If a picture needed to be touched up, it ould be sent to another lab that specialized in retouching.
Twenty years ago, we decided we would not process the film we hot," Greer explained.
"We would leave that technical aspect to other rofessionals who had the exact technology, training, and expertise and  desire to make money that way.
We wanted to make money by taking he pictures.
It was a good plan then, and may be a good plan today, but t is no longer possible."
hy?
The world went flat, and every analog process went digital, vir ual, mobile, and personal.
In the last three years, digital cameras for pro essional photographers achieved a whole new technical level that made hem equal, if not superior, to traditional film cameras.
So we experimented with several different cameras and chose the cur ent state-of-the-art camera that was most like our [analog] film cameras," reer said.
"Its called a Canon D l , and it's the same exact camera as our ilm camera, except there's a computer inside with a little TV-screen dis lay on the back that shows us what picture we're taking.
But it uses all the ame lenses, you set things the same way, shutter speed and aperture, it as the same ergonomics.
It was the first professional digital camera that orked exactiy like a film camera.
This was a defining moment.
After we got this digital camera, it was incredibly liberating at first," aid Greer.
"All of the thrill and excitement of photography were there  xcept that the film was free.
Because it was digital, we didn't have to buy ilm and we didn't have to go to the lab to have it processed and wait to et it back.
If we were on location and shooting something, we could see f we got the shot right away.
There was instant gratification.
We referred o it as an 'electronic Polaroid.'
We used to have an art director who ould oversee everything to make sure that we were capturing the image e were trying to create, but we would never really know until we got it eveloped.
Everyone had to go on faith, on trust.
Our clients paid us a rofessional fee because they felt they needed an expert who could not  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nly click a button, but knew exactly how to shape and frame the image.
nd they trusted us to do that."
or a year or so there was this new sense of empowerment, freedom, reativity, and control.
But then Ken and his team discovered that this ew liberating technology could also be enslaving.
"We discovered that ot only did we now have the responsibility of shooting the picture and efining the desired artistic expression, we had to get involved in the echnology of the photograph.
We had to become the lab.
We woke up ne morning and said, W e are the lab.'"
ow so?
Because digital cameras gave Greer the ability to download hose digital images into a PC or laptop and, with a little magic software nd hardware, perform all sorts of new functions.
"So in addition to be ng the photographer, we had to become the processing lab and the color eparator," said Greer.
Once the technology made that possible, Greer's ustomers demanded it.
Because Greer could control the image farther own the supply chain, they said he should control it, he must control it.
nd then they also said because it was all digital now, and all under his ontrol, it should be included among the services his team provided as he photographic creators of the image.
"The clients said, 'We will not ay you extra for it,' " said Greer.
"We used to go to an outside service to ouch up the picturesto remove red-eye or blemishesbut now we ave to be the retouchers ourselves also.
They expect [red-eye] to be re oved by us, digitally, even before they see it.
For twenty years we only racticed the art of photographycolor and composition and texture nd how to make people comfortable in front of a camera.
This is what e were good at.
Now we had to learn to be good at all these other things.
t is not what we signed up for, but the competitive marketplace and the echnology forced us into it."
reer said every aspect of his company went through a similar flat ening.
Film production went digital, so the marketplace and the tech ology forced them to become their own film editors, graphics studio, ound production facility, and everything else, including producers of heir own DVDs.
Each of those functions used to be farmed out to a sep rate company.
The whole supply chain got flattened and shrunk into ne box that sat on someone's desktop.
The same thing happened in the OW C O M P A N I E S C O P E raphics part of their business: Greer & Associates became their own ypesetters, illustrators, and sometimes even printers, because they owned igital color printers.
"Things were supposed to get easier," he said.
Now I feel like I'm going to McDonald's, but instead of getting fast food, 'm being asked to bus my own table and wash the dishes too."
e continued: "It is as if the manufacturers of technology got to ether with our clients and outsourced all of these different tasks to us.
If e put our foot down and say you have to pay for each of these services, here is someone right behind us saying, 'I will do it all.'
So the services equired go up significantly and the fees you can charge stay the same or o down."
t's called commoditization, and in the wake of the triple conver ence, it is happening faster and faster across a whole range of industries.
s more and more analog processes become digital, virtual, mobile, and ersonal, more and more jobs and functions are being standardized, dig tized, and made both easy to manipulate and available to more players.
hen everything is the same and supply is plentiful, said Greer, lients have too many choices and no basis on which to make the right hoice.
And when that happens, you're a commodity.
You are vanilla.
ortunately, Greer responded to commoditization by opting for the nly survival strategy that works: a shovel, not a wall.
He and his associates ug inside themselves to locate the company's real core competency, and his has become the primary energy source propelling their business for ard in the flat world.
"What we sell now," said Greer, "is strategic insight, reative instinct, and artistic flair.
We sell inspired, creative solutions, we ell personality.
Our core competence and focus is now on all those things hat cannot be digitized.
I know our clients today and our clients in the fu ure will only come to us and stick with us for those things...
So we hired ore thinkers and outsourced more technology pieces."
n the old days, said Greer, many companies "hid behind technology.
ou could be very good, but you didn't have to be the world's best, be ause you never thought you were competing with the world.
There was  horizon out there and no one could see beyond that horizon.
But just n the space of a few years we went from competing with firms down the treet to competing with firms across the globe.
Three years ago it was in-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T onceivable that Greer & Associates would lose a contract to a company n England, and now we have.
Everyone can see what everyone else is oing now, and everyone has the same tools, so you have to be the very est, the most creative thinker."
anilla just won't put food on the table anymore.
"You have to offer omething totally unique," said Greer.
"You need be able to make hocolate Chip Cookie Dough, or Cherry Garcia, or Chunky Monkey" hree of the more exotic brands of Ben & Jerry's ice cream that are very onvanilla.
"It used to be about what you were able to do," said Greer.
Clients would say, 'Can you do this?
Can you do that?'
Now it's much ore about the creative flair and personality you can bring to [the as ignment] .
It's all about imagination."
ou and the lat World WELVE lobalization of the Local he Cultural Revolution Is About to Begin   1999 book The Lexus and the Olive Tree attempted to de cribe the forces that were globalizing the world at the end of he twentieth century and their effects on economics, politics, eopolitics, environment, and culture.
After the first edition of The World s Flat first came out, several readers complained to me that I had not fol owed up on the cultural part of my argument in The Lexus and the Olive reeI had made no mention of how this new flattening era of global zation, at the dawn of the twenty-first century, was affecting culture round the world.
I acknowledged this and explained that it was simply  matter of not having had enough time to think through that issue.
This pdated edition of the book has given me a chance to do just that, and I m glad it has, because the flattening of the world is having surprising, mportant, and paradoxical effects on culture around the world.
s the flattening phase of globalization began to gain momentum fol owing the fall of the Berlin Wall, there was a considerable and justi iable worry around the world that "globalization means Americanization."
his worry was not unreasonable, because it was primarily American-based anufacturers and service providers, American brands and American oviemakers, American singers and American entertainers, American lothing designers and American fast-food chains that were in the best posi ion to take advantage of the falling of the walls and flattening of the world.
hey were the first out of the gates, and it seemed inevitable and unstop able that they would take advantage of the flat world to homogenize cul ure.
If you were from another culture, no matter how robust and vibrant  H E W O R L D IS F L A T our distinctive dress, language, food, or music, you had to worry that you ould be easily steamrolled.
In the constant struggle between the homoge izing and particularizing forces of globalization, it seemed like the homogenizing-Americanizing forces were destined to triumph.
Globalization ould have an American face, an American look, and an American taste.
his naturally triggered a backlash against globalization as a form of American cultural imperialism."
Many people around the world argued that nless we took serious steps to strengthen culturesand protect the environ entthe juggernaut of globalization as Americanization could, in just a ew decades, wipe out the cultural, ecological, and zoological diversity that ook millions of years of human, plant, and animal evolution to produce.
here is no minimizing the dangers posed to the environment by the lattening of the world, as I explained in the previous chapter.
However, s far as culture is concerned, there is reason to hope that the flattening f the world will not necessarily pave the way for a red, white, and blue ultural homogenization.
Indeed, it is becoming clear that the flat-world latform, while it has the potential to homogenize cultures, also has, I ould argue, an even greater potential to nourish diversity to a degree hat the world has never seen before.
hy?
Primarily because of uploading.
Uploading makes possible "the lobalization of the local."
The fact that so many people worldwide now ave the tools to create and upload their own contenttheir own news re orts, their own opinions, their own music, their own videos, their own pho os, their own software, their own encyclopedias, their own dictionaries s a very powerful force for the preservation and enhancement of cultural utonomy and particularity.
The flat-world platform enables you to take our own local culture and upload it to the world.
It means you aren't stuck ownloading Mickey Mouse and McDonald's.
No, no, no.
You can now rite your own song, create a podcast version in any language you like, and hare it with the world on some podcast site, and if people like it, it will pread.
You can now make your own home video with a cheap Webcam nd Microsoft Movie Maker that comes bundled with your software and pload that as well.
The most popular food in the world is not the Big Mac.
t's pizza.
And what is pizza?
It is just a flat piece of dough on which every ulture puts its own distinctive foods and flavors.
So Japan has sushi pizza LOBALIZATION OF T H E LOCAL nd Bangkok has Thai pizza and Lebanon has mezze pizza.
The flatworld platform is just like that pizza dough.
It allows different cultures to eason and flavor it as they likeand you are going to see that more now han ever.
t the same time, the fact that people in rising nations like India and hina will be able to innovate without having to emigrate means that lo al cultures have a much better chance of being preserved.
A young ndian engineer no longer has to stand in line outside the U.S. embassy n New Delhi and pray to win the lottery and secure a visa to America so hat he or she can move to frigid Minnesota and give up his or her native ress, native cuisine, native music, and extended familyall the things hat make up a native culture just to get a decent engineering job at M. That is a very good thing for the preservation of Indian local culture.
ultures are nested in environments, and the fact that more people can ow not only survive but even thrive by staying home in their native re ion, in their own environment, has got to be a net plus for the forces of ultural diversity versus the forces of homogeneity.
oreover, even those individuals who have had to uproot themselves rom developing countries to go westto Europe or America in particu arhave been able to take advantage of the flattening of the world to old on to many aspects of their local culture, even if they are living in he midst of a different one thousands of miles away.
Thanks to their abil ty to read their local newspapers online, to communicate with family nd friends by phone for almost nothing using voice over the Internet echnology, to watch daily news from Cairo or Calcutta (in Arabic and indi) thanks to Internet or satellite TV, the forces of particularization ow seem to be as strong as the forces of homogenization.
f course, Americanization via globalization is still a very powerful orce.
One should never underestimate it.
But somehow, more than a ecade after the fall of the Berlin Wall, it no longer seems inevitable that veryone is going to look, speak, sing, dance, and think like an American ecause of globalization.
s it happens, "globalization of the local" is an expression I first saw sed by an Indian-born expert on globalization and cultural identity, ndrajit Banerjee, the secretary general of the Asian Media Information  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nd Communication Centre (AMIC).
In an interview with Felix Soh of he Straits Times of Singapore (September 11, 2005), Banerjee ex lained that he coined the term to describe the phenomenon that allows iaspora communities around the world to use today's global media net orks to cling to their local mores, news, traditions, and friends no atter where they are living.
As Soh put it in the introduction to his in erview with Banerjee, globalization of the local "is globalization in re erse.
Instead of global media enveloping Asia, the region's local' media re going global.
This phenomenon of the globalization of the local is eing driven by the demand for local news and information from Asia's iasporas, notably the millions of Chinese and Indian emigres now living n all parts of the world."
anerjee, who has a Ph.D. in communications from the Sorbonne, in aris, sees this from his perch in Singapore, where he teaches at a university: One would think that globalization in Asia would mean going English, but hat's not the case," he said in the interview with The Straits Times.
"The diasporic market means you can have international newspapers, international V and radio channels which are completely based on local languages.
This s what I call the globalization of the local.
It is not the global which comes nd envelops us.
It is the local which goes global."
oday Britain and the United States have television channels where the rogramming is all in Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, or Japanese.
"If you have opulations spread all over the world, then you can use effectively the satel ite platforms to broadcast to pockets all over the world," added Banerjee.
If you put these pockets together, they become a huge global market."
oh pointed out that Zee TV, the biggest Indian entertainment net ork, had blazed a trail for other Indian T V channels to go regional in sia.
Said Banerjee: "Zee T V has a very clear Indian marketit is the ndian diaspora.
Its programming is in Hindi.
For Zee TV, competition s really not an issue.
It doesn't want to capture the other language audi nces."
He added, "Also, in the near future, Asia will be a major pro ucer of media content, which is a very positive development.
For a long ime, Asia was a receiver of content from the West.
Now because we're oming of age and becoming mature, our media experiences are sub tantial.
This, together with the rich culture and heritage of Asia, pre- LOBALIZATION OF THE LOCAL ents the region with tremendous potential to be a content-trading hub.
ndia has one of the world's biggest film industries.
It is producing a lot of elevision content.
South Korea and Japan are very strong in anima ion .
My belief is that the global is going to be interesting only if it is a ange of the local.
The whole diversity of local experiences and local ontent is present, rather than one content producer, one language, one ultural perspective and one ideology dominating the world."
ndia, for instance, has exploded recently as a platform for the out ourcing of game designs and cartoon animation.
I was struck by some hing the head of one of these companies said to me when I visited.
Ashish ulkarni, COO of JadooWorks in Bangalore, explained that India had an bundance of traditional artists, who were able to make the transition eas ly to computerized digital painting.
Many of these artists are the children f Hindu temple sculptors and painters.
"We train them to transform their raditional skills to animation in a digital format," said Kulkarni.
But to eep up their traditional Indian painting skills, JadooWorks also had set side a room where artists could retreat to indulge in their native artistry ecause the two skills reinforce each other.
Companies like JadooWorks ome and go with the demands of the global market and who can offer he best, cheapest artists at any given time.
But before the world got flat, ndia had virtually no companies doing this business at all.
Now, a new eneration of Indian artists at least has a chance to maintain or advance heir skills rather than drive taxis to earn a living.
"We now tell the parents: If your kids are doing well in drawing in seventh grade, you must think of aking a career in animation,'" said Kulkarni.
"That was difficult five ears back, but today, because of more exposure, we can get people to hink they can transform their skills that their fathers had" and thereby hold n to them.
I interviewed Deepak Ganguly, a slender twenty-eight-year-old omputer artist who was then working at JadooWorks.
"My parents are rtists, my mother is a sculptor at home," he explained.
"My father was a car et designer, he made designs for Indian carpets.
I had a knack for drawing, ecause I was brought up in this kind of climate, so I came into this field.
hen I started this animation career, at the time 3-D [computers for draw ng] were not here in India .
So I did a course in 2-D classical animation nd I was a 2-D animator.
When this 3-D boom happened in India [in the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ast couple years], I decided to jump.
I was working at a small studio in elhi.
We used to watch movies and Star Wars and their computergenerated things.
Then I got the chance to learn that skill."
Globalization, aid Ganguly, was enabling him to take his skills and now sell them all over he world.
"With all the easy sharing in the electronic media," he said, "we an get the work here easier, we can send our skills over there easier."
o listen to some of the critics, though, you would think that global zation was only about the spread of crass capitalism, global brands, fast ood, and consumer values all crowding out warm, cozy, thriving local ommunities, industries, and cultures.
There is no question that the orces of globalization do some or all of these things in many places on any days.
But globalization is not simply about the spread of capitalism r markets or enhanced trade.
It is not an exclusively economic phe omenon and its impact is not exclusively economic.
It is a much roader, deeper, and more complex phenomenon, involving new forms f communication and innovation.
The flattening of the world is about he creation of a global platform for multiple forms of sharing work, nowledge, and entertainment.
Worrying about the pulverizing effects of lobalization is very legitimate, indeed very important, but ignoring its bility also to empower individuals and enrich our cultural cornucopia isses its potentially positive effects on human freedom and diversity.
y point here is not that the flattening of the world will always enrich nd preserve culture.
My point is that it doesn't always destroy culture, hich is the message you hear if you listen only to the globalization crit cs.
The iron law of globalization is very simple: If you think it is all good r all bad, you don't get it.
Globalization has empowering and disempowering, homogenizing and particularizing, democratizing and au horitarian tendencies all built into it.
It is about the global market, but it s also about the Internet and Google.
ne should have no doubtI certainly don'tthat the flat world mpowers the forces of darkness as well as the forces of light.
You can up oad homemade pornography, homegrown racism, lies, conspiracy theo ies, and just plain hokum, and spread them easier, faster, and farther on he flat-world platform as well.
The New York Times, on December 19, 005, ran a chilling front-page story about a teenage boy, Justin Berry, LOBALIZATION OF THE LOCAL who was drawn into performing in front of [a] Webcam undressing, howering, masturbating and even having sexfor an audience of more han 1,500 people, who paid him, over the years, hundreds of thousands f dollars."
What is really ironic is that they often paid him by using ayPal.comthe online payment system owned by eBay to make it easy or individuals to buy and sell on its auction site.
or all these reasons, our job is not to trash this platform but to get the est out of it and to prevent the worst.
he kind of globalization we are talking about nowwith the nternet and the flattening of the world"is a different kind of globaliza ion than the one that is in the minds of the people who have been criti izing globalization," remarked Israeli political theorist Yaron Ezrahi.
"It as different opportunities and dangers."
In cultural terms, the globaliza ion of the local "is allowing a local group of human rights supporters to ecome part of an international community and feel that solidarity, and he same with environmentalists.
And the same, unfortunately, is true ith neo-Nazis and al-Qaeda sympathizers.
Wherever human beings ave the freedom to create communities, they can create progressive or riminal ones.
But the fact is that the Internet has magnified the ca acity of individuals to generate their own stories and inscribe themselves n the world, both as individuals and as part of communities.
Should we e against that?
Of course not."
s of the printing of this book, Google was available in 116 different anguages, from Arabic to Zulu to several versions of Chinese.
The more eople can easily inform themselves in their own languages, the more ikely those languages and texts are to survive and the more likely others ill write in them and not feel compelled to switch to English.
Search is ne of the ten flatteners, and the globalization of the local will be steadily nhanced as search engines gradually spread to every corner of the flat orld.
ut the flattening of the world is bringing diversity to different corners f the world, even without the Internet.
There is more radio today, more V, more phone, more travel, more trade.
The Ghana-born Princeton rofessor and philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah expressed this well in n essay for The New York Times Magazine (January 1, 2006) titled "The  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ase for Contamination."
Using a visit to his mother in Kumasi, hanathe town he grew up inhe adduced a variety of examples to ake the point that people in Africa today, even villagers, are not just ob ects that the West or the modern world inscribes itself upon.
They are also ubjects subjects who are in a much more dynamic give-and-take  dopt, adapt, import, re-export, and innovate relationship with the orld, thanks to globalization.
"Yes, globalization can produce homo eneity," he wrote.
"But globalization is also a threat to homogeneity .
hen people talk of the homogeneity produced by globalization, what hey are talking about is this: Even here, the villagers will have radios though the language will be local); you will be able to get a discussion oing about Ronaldo, Mike Tyson, or Tupac; and you will probably be ble to find a bottle of Guinness or Coca-Cola (as well as of Star or Club, hana's own fine lagers).
But has access to these things made the place ore homogeneous or less?
And what can you tell about people's souls rom the fact that they drink Coca-Cola?
It's true that the enclaves of ho ogeneity you find these daysin Asante as in Pennsylvaniaare less istinctive than they were a century ago, but mostly in good ways.
More f them have access to effective medicines.
More of them have access to lean drinking water, and more of them have schools.
Where, as is still oo common, they don't have these things, it's something not to celebrate ut to deplore.
And whatever loss of difference there has been, they are onstantly inventing new forms of difference: new hairstyles, new slang, ven, from time to time, new religions.
No one could say that the world's illages are becoming anything like the same."
he newest anti-homogenizing force is podcastinga whole new tool or globalizing the local.
I got a glimpse into this phenomenon in ctober 2005 when I visited a small apartment in suburban Shanghai hat is home to China's leading podcasting Web site, Toodou.com.
"We lready have thirteen thousand channels on our site, and about five thou and of them are updated regularly," explained Gary Wang, thirty-two, he Fuzhou-born and U.S.-and French-educated Chinese engineer who ounded Toodou, which means "potato" in Chinese.
Any Chinese can reate his or her own channel of video or audio content on Toodou, and ther individuals sign up to get the content on that channel each time LOBALIZATION OF THE LOCAL ew material is uploaded.
For now, the service is free; eventually Toodou ill charge a monthly subscription.
I want to create hundreds of thousands of different channels, main ained by just average people, where other people can access them and ownload the material," added Wang.
And he will, because the ease of ploading and podcasting means there are almost no barriers to entry, as ong as you have a computer, a camera, and a microphone.
(There are till political limits on what you can say from China, but who knows how ong those limits will be sustainable.
Toodou.com censors porn and any hing that violates Chinese law or directly threatens the Communist overnment.)
oodou's most popular podcast when I visited was a video of two wenty-year-old Chinese women lip-synching a popular Cantonese rock une.
"They got bored," explained Wang, so they went out and bought heir own Webcam (which can be found in Shanghai for the equivalent f $6), used Microsoft Movie Maker (software that comes bundled with indows XP), made their own three-minute MTV-like podcast, and up oaded it onto Toodou.com.
It was viewed seventy-five thousand times in he first three months.
"It took them one hour to make and fifteen min tes to edit," said Wang.
The girls, who call themselves "The Beans," ow have their own online fan club.
nother favorite is a podcast by two Chinese architecture students earing Houston Rockets jerseys (the team of Chinese-born NBA star ao Ming) and lip-synching a Backstreet Boys tune.
A slide show on life n Shenzhen had been viewed sixteen thousand times, prompting all sorts f accompanying commentary from viewers around China.
The secondhighest-viewed podcast when I visited was a concert by an underground ock band at a Shanghai bar.
Toodou's goal, said Wang, "will be to con ect [Chinese] people to their tastes and to their potential collaborators.
e will have a huge content database and we will share the revenue with ontent providers."
Wang added: "We created this platform for free par icipation, and people [just] come in.
With all kinds of tools becoming heaper and cheaper, the creative part of people will naturally grow."
es, I know, I am a little ahead of myself.
Very few Chinese have ever ven seen an iPod, so most of the podcasting that does exist here is  H E W O R L D IS F L A T reated and viewed or heard on PCs.
Once the price of an iPod (music r video) comes down, though, there will be a huge podcast market here.
any of the current podcasts are junk, but the quality, too, will surely mprove.
The ease of podcasting will force competition and experimen ation.
Wang first heard of podcasting only in 2004.
Some thirteen onths later he had the most popular podcasting site in China, with one undred thousand registered users, eight employees, forty volunteers, nd a U.S. venture capital backer.
News of his site was spread for free by hinese bloggers.
The office/apartment he was using when I visited ents for $500 a month, and some of his employees also slept there.
lmost all the software that runs Toodou.com is from free, open-source aterial on the Weban Apache Webserver; FreeBSD, a free Unix op rating system; MySQL, a free database system; and PHP, free program ing language.
Wang wrote the algorithms that run Toodou.com himself.
omparing China to America and Europe, where he studied, Wang aid, "With the same amount of money, I can do ten times more here .
can live on $1,000 a month in Shanghai and have the latest technology nd all these serversanything you can find in the U.S. is here."
n China, the combination of low costs and lowered barriers is making he process of creating cultural content cheaper and as a result more pop lar.
That's why I am confident that this flattening phase of globalization s not going to mean more Americanization, but more globalization of lo al cultures, art forms, styles, recipes, literature, videos, and opinions  ore and more local content made global.
We have different songs [than Americans] and we want to express ifferent things, but the desire is the same," said Wang.
"We all want to e seen and heard and be able to create stuff we like and share i t .
eople from all over the world will draw knowledge and inspiration from he same technology platform, but different cultures will flourish on it.
It s the same soil, but different trees will grow."
nd you thought the Cultural Revolution was over.
Sorry, it's just be inning.
Only China's newest Cultural Revolution is going to be driven his time from the bottom upthanks to the flat-world platformby odcasters with Apple's little white iPods, not from the top down by aoists with Little Red Books.
LOBALIZATION OF THE LOCAL  e globalization of the local is not only happening culturally but lso commercially.
Just as the flattening of the world is starting to qualize and diversify the flow of culture, it is also starting to equalize nd diversify the flow of investmentso globalization is no longer driven rimarily by American or Western multinationals.
More and more hinese, Indian, Brazilian, Russian, Asian, and even African companies re doing business globally.
he Davos World Economic Forum is always a useful barometer of lobal trends, and at Davos 2007, for the first time, I began to really feel he globalization of the local happening in business to a significant de ree.
First, I had breakfast with Mohammed Shafik Gabr, a leading gyptian entrepreneur.
Shafik's company, the Artoc Group for Investment nd Development, was involved in building two new cities in Egypt from he ground up, but that's not what struck me most.
I was struck by the anagers Shafik was recruiting to Cairo to run his rapidly expanding ompany.
He explained to me that he had just hired as his new group OO an American of Egyptian origin who had worked for Coca-Cola n Atlanta, London, and Africa; he had hired an American Asia expert ased in Hong Kong as his vice chairman for policy and business devel pment; and he had hired a Frenchman as group general manager for is real estate subsidiary.
It was clear that Shafik was preparing to go ag ressively into new marketsthe "new markets" of America, Asia, and rance!
A week later (January 31, 2007), the Financial Times carried the ollowing lead story: "Tata Steel of India won the batde to control AngloDutch steelmaker Corus on Wednesday, after more than eight hours f head-to-head bidding against Companhia Siderurgica Nacional of razil."
This was the first large foreign acquisition by an Indian company, nd it was a doozy  6.2 billion to take over Corus, which owns almost he entire steel industries of Britain and the Netherlands.
So an Indian ompany outbid a Brazilian company to take over the biggest steel com anies in Britain and the Netherlands!
n the middle of the Davos forum, Nathan Gardels, editor of Global iewpoint magazine, wrote an essay for the International Herald Tribune  H E W O R L D IS F L A T January 24, 2007) that summarized these trends: "Globalization now elongs to everyone who can figure out how to take advantage of its op ortunities and minimize its dislocations.
American-bred technology ay be its midwife, but Americans are no longer solely the parents.
hat's a big power shift indeed."
ndeed, if these trends continue, it is inevitable that globalization will inally become, well, globalboth culturally and commerciallya rocess no longer driven from America and Europe but from all four cor ers of the flat world.
HIRTEEN f If s Not Happening, t's Because You're Not Doing It   I came into the office in the morning and I turned on my com uter and suddenly I found five thousand e-mails waiting for me, ll with the same basic complaint, all stirred up by the same orga ization that I'd never heard of beforesome little group with a Web site n Canada run by two people, a dog, and $10,000.
So I turned to my sec etary and asked, 'Who are these people?
Where did they come from?'
he had no clue.
'Never heard of them, boss,' she said to me.
'Let me heck with my kids.'
'Oh, that's greatcheck with your kids,' I thought.
My secretary's kids are now my strategic advisers!'
So I called our corpo ate PR folks and asked, 'Somebody tell me, what do I have to do to make hese people go away?'
" 've just made up this story, but not from whole cloth.
I heard many ifferent variations on this theme from CEOs while working on the up ated version of the book.
It is all about the moment when the C E O had is or her first encounter with "these people."
"These people" are this eneration's social activists and social entrepreneurs, who have been uperempowered by the flattening of the world.
The Internet today gives ven the smallest groups the ability to upload and globalize their ac ivismby building global coalitions that expose or embarrass the iggest multinationals.
If these guys or gals use the Internet and the flat orld to mount a campaign that is bogus or dishonest, it won't have any asting impact.
But if it has merit, they can get the biggest multinational o change its behavior, or beg for mercy, overnight.
And if and when  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ompanies do the right things, the praise they win from the activist com unity can have real value to them.
realized just how much social entrepreneurs can affect business de isions when I picked up The New York Times (March 8, 2007) and read hat the NGO Environmental Defense had just hired the boutique Wall treet firm Perella Weinberg Partners to advise it on a megadeal it had ecome involved in negotiating.
The story started in 2006 when the giant exas power company, TXU Corp., announced plans to build eleven new oal-fired, C0 -belching power plants, raising the ire of environmental sts worried about climate change.
Fred Krupp, the president of En ironmental Defense, which has an office in Texas, wrote C. John Wilder, he C E O of TXU, and asked for a meeting, but he was brushed off.
XU made clear that it was on a fast track to build its plants and had the overnor of Texas on its side.
Message to environmentalists: G E T LOST.
alk about not knowing what world you're living in.
o Environmental Defense turned to the Web and created StopTXU com, a site that put out regular electronic newsletters on the TXU plans nd built a national constituency opposed to the deal.
TXU's plans to build eleven power plants made it a Goliath, given the cale of carbon emissions that would have resultedseventy-eight mil ion tons of C O a yearand the scale of its disdain for the public interest," aid Krupp.
"We had to establish just how far out of the mainstream TXU as in terms of carbon emissions and keep them in a very public bull'seye, which we did via a dedicated Web site and a regular e-newsletter to exas media, political players, opinion leaders, and activists."
ll of those efforts paid off when the big buyout firms Kohlberg ravis Roberts and Texas Pacific Group teamed up to offer $45 billion to uy TXU in early 2007.
It was going to be the largest leveraged buyout in istory, but there was a catch: "The buyers did not want to take over a ompany enmeshed in a war with environmentalists," said Krupp, "so hey came to us and said, 'We only want to go forward if you and NRDC Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental advocacy roup] will praise what we are trying to do here.'"
Environmental efense and NRDC were ready to engage, but only if the deal would ake the new company more climate friendly.
F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G The negotiations involved talks over ten days," said Krupp, "and the ey session was compressed into seventeen hours in the Mandarin riental hotel in San Franciscofrom eight a.m. to one a.m. the next orning."
Eventually, the buyout group agreed to cut the number of ew TXU coal plants from eleven to three, to support a federal cap n carbon emissions, and to commit TXU to plowing $400 million nto energy-efficiency programs and doubling its purchase of wind ower.
In return, the environmentalists blessed the deal, but Krupp lso hired Perella Weinberg to help negotiate the fine print as the con racts closed.
hat is a pretty good day's work for people who had no money on the able.
hat are the lessons?
Krupp answered with a question: "What is the essage when the largest buyout in history is made contingent [by the uyers] on winning praise for its greenhouse-gas plan?
It tells us that he markets are ahead of the politicians.
The world has changed and hese guys see it."
XU had not.
Talking to itself in Texas, it didn't understand that it ould not manage its reputation simply by putting out press releases, ecause, thanks to the Internet, ordinary people could shape TXU's mage on a global basis through the Webfor almost no money.
The reputations of companies are going to be less determined by the uality of their PR people and more by their actual actions, and that em owers more of an honest debate on the merits," said Krupp.
"Going on ine, we shifted this from a local debate over generating electricity to a ational debate over capping and reducing carbon emissions.
So what XU hoped would be just a local skirmish instead was watched on com uter screens in every global market."
The TXU example shows that ruth plus passion plus the Internet, said Krupp, "can create an irre istible tide for change."
eferring to these sudden outbreaks of citizen activism, the ashington lobbyist of a major global biochemical company put it to e this way: "We were operating under the old rules and then the old ules changed, but nobody put up a sign."
The old paradigm, she ex lained, was simple: Your company develops a product, government ap-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T roves the product, people buy the product, and everyone is happy.
New aradigm: You develop the product, you test the product, government pproves the product, farmers buy the product, farmers use the product, onsumers say, "Hey, wait a second, we don't like this product!"
and sud enly there is a vast Internet campaign against bioengineering directed t your company, with people all over the world demanding: "Who re you to play with my food?"
et me introduce the people who changed the rules overnight.
They ome in many forms.
Some are business school grads with the soul of eace Corps volunteers, some are political activists with a knack for sing the Web to raise money or raise an army, some are environmen alists who hope to save the planet by tutoring the biggest corporations on ow to increase their profits by getting green, and some are philan hropists who see in the proliferation of low-cost communication devices  whole new tool kit to help the poor help themselves.
hat they all have in common, though, is a burning desire to make n impact and a firm belief that the flattening of the world makes being n activist-entrepreneur easier and cheaper than ever before.
In fact, this ind of activism is now so easy, so cheap, so readily available to even the mallest player that I would throw down this gauntlet to today's young eneration: If it's not happening, it's because you're not doing it.
ou want to raise money for African poverty relief, for Darfur efugees, or to save the elephants of Sri Lanka?
The Web provides you a lobal platform and a global audience.
You want to highlight environ ental degradation in the Amazon or potholes in your own neighbor ood?
You can post the pictures on www.flickr.com or upload your wn documentary on YouTube or record your own podcast.
You can blog bout injustice and you can blog to raise money for your favorite candi ate.
If your arguments or video or photos or voice are compelling, you'll ventually find an audience or it will find you.
ut you can also be effective without the Web.
If you have an entre reneurial bent, a passport, a little cash, and a lot of gumption, you can o off and start a small business just about anywhereand create better obs for people who are making only $1 a day rather than just protesting n their behalf at the next World Bank meeting.
Because the flattening F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G f the world extends free markets farther into different corners of the orld, now social entrepreneurs can leverage those markets to deliver obs, services, and profits for all kinds of people not just for the rich but lso for the poor and the aspiring middle class.
ere's a quick survey of some of the types of social entrepreneurship nd activism being enabled by the flattening of the world.
ssibly the best-known social entrepreneur-activist in the world to ay is Muhammad Yunus, a Bangladeshi who was awarded the 2006 obel Peace Prize.
In 1976, Yunus founded the Grameen Bank, which ranted small loans, without collateral, to the very poorest members of is society.
In the quarter century that followed, by proving that the poor ould make good use of this money and pay back the loans, he helped to nspire a whole new banking industry"microfinance."
When I inter iewed Yunus in the fall of 2005, the thing that struck me most about im was his unbounded energy and obvious inner drive.
His work had lready gained much international attention, and he was about to win a obel Prize, but all he wanted to do was grab me by the lapels to tell me bout his current project and solicit ideas for his next one.
have never met a man who had more respect for the entrepreneur al talents of the poor and a better grasp of how much self-respect comes rom starting a business of your own, no matter how small.
For a poor erson, Yunus explained to me, "microcredit is the key to unlocking ourself, and once you do that you see yourself differently.
Instead of al ays petitioning, you go through self-discovery.
You explore your own imitless potential."
That was why he had recently begun a program to ive small loans, as small as the equivalent of $10, to beggarsyes, beg ars!
Yunus said his bank has employees who approach beggars on the treets of Dhaka, Bangladesh, and asks them, " 'As you go from house to ouse, would you like to carry some sweets and toys, so you do both beg ing and sellingand whichever works out best, you go with that' And hat a change that makes!
Because then you [as a beggar] start to think, What will sell well?
Oh, you like this?
I can bring you more tomorrow.'
e have more than eighty thousand beggars in that program and many  H E W O R L D IS F L A T lready quit begging, because they're already successful sellers.
Many ave become part-time beggars and full-time salespeople."
t Grameen Bank, 97 percent of the borrowers are women, and the ayback rate is 98 percent.
As Yunus said to me, "Not having collateral is ne thing, but not being creditworthy is another."
The poor are very cred tworthy when given the chance.
ho knewuntil Yunus tried?
He was teaching "elegant theories" of conomics at Chittagong University in 1976 but wanted to find a way to elp the poor and starving people he saw all around him on campus.
"I aw the moneylenders squeezing the last drop of blood from people be ore they went down," he said, referring to the way scoundrels in the de eloping world prey on the poor by lending them money at exorbitant ates and then breaking their bones if they don't pay it back.
So, on a unch, he lent $27 to a group of poor local craftsmen and then, to lever ge that amount, offered himself as guarantor of a larger loan they took rom a traditional bank.
The loan worked out well, and that little spark rew into the Grameen Bank Project.
Yunus' innovation has broad appeal," BusinessWeek reported in its ecember 26, 2005, issue.
"In 1997 only about 7.6 million families had een served by microcredit worldwide, according to the 2005 State of the icrocredit Summit Campaign Report.
As of Dec. 31,2004, some 3,200 icrocredit institutions reported reaching more than 92 million clients, ccording to the report.
Almost 73% of them were living in dire poverty t the time of their first loan .
'If banks made large loans, he made mall loans.
If banks required paperwork, his loans were for the illiterate.
hatever banks did, he did the opposite,' marvels Sam Daley-Harris, di ector of the Microcredit Summit Campaign."
see social entrepreneurs like Yunus popping up everywhere, and not ll of them are focused on just the bottom rung of society.
As important s it is to help make poor people into small business people, it is just as mportant to make small business people in a developing country into ig business people who can employ lots of their neighbors.
As the saying oes: Feed a person a fish and you have fed that person only for a day.
each a person to fish and you have fed that person for a lifetime.
But I F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G ould add: Help that person grow a fishing business and you will have ed not only his family but also half the village.
onsider, for instance, Endeavor, founded in 1997 by Linda Rottenberg and Peter Kellner, who are what I would call "mentor capitalists."
ndeavor (www.endeavor.org) was formed for the purpose of promoting ntrepreneurship in emerging markets, beginning in Latin America.
Its asic model is to link up small and midsize businesses with seasoned en repreneurs so that the little guys and gals can get the advice and contacts hey need to grow their companies into bigger businesses that can em loy more people the best antipoverty program of all.
This form of ocial entrepreneurship is critically important but is not always ap reciated.
As The Wall Street Journal reported in a story about Endeavor April 15, 2003), "Latin America has long been viewed as a wasteland of usiness start-ups, with neither the financing nor the social mobility eeded to nourish entrepreneurial dreams .
Many development gencies in the region were focused on microcredits.
Endeavor's cho en beneficiariespeople with small to midsize businesses hoping to trike it richdidn't always elicit sympathy from donors.
Ms. Rottenberg emembers one foundation rejecting her on the grounds that she was just helping the middle class.'"
ut it is precisely these sorts of middle-class start-ups and small busi esses that create the most jobs and the greatest innovation in a society.
As ottenberg, Endeavor's cofounder and C E O , explained to me in an -mail, "The important work done by Grameen, Action, BancoSol and ther terrific micro-finance institutions has drawn attention to the need or small-scale loans to assist women and men at the bottom of the pyra id.
But what we've found consistently in emerging markets is a gap: here is little support for entrepreneurs beyond the micro-credit stage.
At he other extreme, access to world-class consulting and investment is imited to companies with $50 million to $100 million in revenues."
y contrast, she explained, "Endeavor enters the picture when en repreneurs have a proven business model that's yielded $500,000 to 20 million in revenueswith significant future growth potential.
We oc asionally take on pure start-ups, but we've found that the true inflection  H E W O R L D IS F L A T oint comes after the entrepreneur has taken the company to a certain oint but needs mentoring and strategic assistance to go to scale.
Most ompanies in emerging markets fail at this inflection point."
ndeavor's results are impressive: Rottenberg says that 96 percent of he entrepreneurs supported by the program are still operating and gen rating sustainable, well-paying jobsan average of 214 jobs per ndeavor company at ten times the minimum wage, and with signifi antly better benefits, too.
"For us, the leverage in supporting these 'highimpact' entrepreneurs comes not only through the direct jobs but also hrough a multiplier effect: one high-impact entrepreneur creates hun reds of jobs, inspires thousands of future entrepreneurs, and the cycle ontinues.
This point rarely enters the debate on philanthropy or even conomic development.
A decade ago when Endeavor was starting, there were neither panish nor Portuguese words for entrepreneur(ship).
In small part due o our efforts and in larger part due to the global economy, the words emprendedor/empreendedor' and 'emprendedorismo/empreendedorismo' have entered into the lexicon."
here is huge untapped potential in this form of social entrepreneurship.
Too often, we have antipoverty debates but not proentrepreneurship debates.
The inspirational power of a local business success tory is incalculable: There is no greater motivator for the poor than look ng at one of their own who makes it big and saying: "If she can do it, I an do it."
\ 7 e t another form of social entrepreneurship is the i f-I-bu i 1 d-i t-th eyX will-benefit model.
My favorite example is Jeremy Hockenstein,  young man who first followed a time-honored path of studying at arvard and going to work for the McKinsey & Company consulting irm, but then, with a colleague from McKinsey, veered totally off ourse and started a not-for-profit firm that does outsourced data entry or American-based companies in one of the least hospitable busi ess environments in the worldpost-Pol Pot Cambodia.
Only in a flat orld!
F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G ere's the story: In February 2001, Hockenstein and some colleagues rom McKinsey decided to go to Phnom Penh, half on vacation and half n a scouting mission for some social entrepreneurship.
They were sur rised to find a city salted with Internet cafs and schools for learning En lishbut with no jobs, or at best limited jobs, for those who graduated.
We decided we would leverage our connections in North America o try to bridge the gap and create some income-generating opportunities or people," Hockenstein said.
That summer, after another trip funded y themselves, Hockenstein and his colleagues opened Digital Divide ata, with a plan to start a small operation in Phnom Penh that would o data entryhiring locals to type into computers printed materials hat companies in the United States wanted in digitized form, so that the ata could be stored on databases and retrieved and searched on com uters.
The material would be scanned in the United States and the files ransmitted over the Internet.
Their first move was to hire two local ambodian managers.
Hockenstein's partner from McKinsey, Jaeson osenfeld, went to New Delhi and knocked on the doors of Indian dataentry companies to see if he could find onejust onethat would take n his two Cambodian managers as trainees.
Nine of the Indian compa ies slammed their doors.
The last thing they wanted was even lower-cost ompetition emerging in Cambodia.
But a generous Hindu soul, Lalit upta, agreed, and Hockenstein got his managers trained.
hey then hired their first twenty data-entry operators, many of hom were Cambodian war refugees, and bought twenty computers and n Internet line that cost them $100 a month.
The project was financed ith $25,000 of their own money and a $25,000 grant from the Global atalyst Foundation, started by Silicon Valley venture capitalists.
They pened for business in July 2001, and their first work assignment was for he Harvard Crimson, Harvard's undergraduate daily newspaper.
The Crimson was digitizing their archives to make them available nline, and because we were Harvard grads they threw some business ur way," said Hockenstein, recalling the company's start-up.
"So our irst project was having Cambodians typing news articles from the arvard Crimson from 1873 to 1899, which reported on Harvard-Yale rew races.
Later, actually, when we got to the years 1969 to 1971, when  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he turmoil in Cambodia was all happening, they were typing [Crimson tories] about their own story.
We would convert the old Crimsons, hich were on microfilm, to digital images in the United States through  company in Oklahoma that specialized in that sort of thing, and then e would just transfer the digital images to Cambodia by FTP [file trans er protocol].
Now you can go to thecrimson.com and download these tories."
The Cambodian typists did not have to know English, only how o type English characters; they worked in pairs, each typing the same ar icle, and then the computer program compared their work to make sure hat there were no errors.
ockenstein said that each of the typists works six hours a day, six days  week, and is paid $75 a month, twice the minimum wage in ambodia, where the average annual income is less than $400.
In addi ion, each typist receives a matching scholarship for the rest of the work ay to go to school, which for most means completing high school but or some has meant going to college.
"Our goal was to break the vicious ycle there of [young people] having to drop out of school to support amilies," said Hockenstein.
"We have tried to pioneer socially responsi le outsourcing.
The U.S. companies working with us are not just saving oney that they can invest somewhere else.
They are actually creating etter lives for some of the poor citizens of the world."
our years after starting up, Digital Divide Data now has 400 em loyees in three offices: Phnom Penh; Battambang, the second-largest ity in Cambodia; and a new office in Vientiane, Laos.
"We recruited ur first two managers in Phnom Penh and sent them to India to get rained in data entry, and then, when we opened the Laos office, we re ruited two managers who were trained by our staff in the Phnom Penh ffice," Hockenstein said.
his tree has scattered all kinds of seeds.
In 2005, when Google an ounced a controversial project to scan libraries full of books, DDD was oncerned that this would cut into its business.
However, in the flat orld, this project announced in Silicon Valley has ended up creating ore jobs in Laos.
Here's how: Another major search portal decided also o scan tens of thousands of books in the United States.
So the books rom an Ivy League university are physically scanned in America, but F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G DD employees in Laos get paid to log on to the computers in the nited States and review each image.
"Our team checks to make sure he images are not crooked or the scanner did not skip a page," explained ockenstein.
"Because of the flat world, it is now affordable to scan any more books with higher quality, whereas before all the steps had to e done by hand in the library."
esides book digitizing and the Harvard Crimson, one of the biggest ources of data-entry work came from NGOs, which wanted the results of heir field surveys about health or families or labor conditions digitized.
oand this is my favorite partsome of the first wave of Digital Divide ata's Cambodian workers left the company shortly after it started and pun off their own firm to design databases for NGOs that want to do sur eys!
Why?
Because while they were working for Digital Divide Data, aid Hockenstein, they kept getting survey work from NGOs that needed o be digitized.
But because the NGOs had not done enough work in ad ance to standardize all the data they were collecting, it was very hard to igitize it in any efficient manner.
So these Cambodian workers realized hat there was value earlier in the supply chain and that they could get aid more for itnot for typing but for designing standardized formats for GOs to collect survey data, which would make the surveys easier and heaper to digitize, collate, and manipulate.
So they started their own ompany to do just thatin Cambodia.
ockenstein argued that none of the jobs being done in Cambodia ame from the United States.
This sort of basic data-entry work got out ourced to India and the Caribbean a long time ago, and, if anywhere, hat is where the jobs were taken from.
But none of this would have been ossible to set up in Cambodia a decade ago.
It all came together in just he last few years.
ockenstein told me about his Cambodian partner, Sophary.
"Until 992 he was living in a refugee camp on the Cambodia-Thai border, hile I was living in Harvard Square as an undergrad.
We were worlds part.
After the UN peace treaty [in Cambodia], he walked home ten ays to his village, and now today he lives in Phnom Penh running igital Divide Data's office."
They now instant-message each other each ight to collaborate on the delivery of services to people and companies  H E W O R L D IS F L A T round the world.
The type of collaboration that is possible today "allows s to be partners and equals," said Hockenstein.
y early 2007, 200 people had graduated from Digital Divide Data's rogram, and they were working in jobs averaging $153 a month.
Almost ll of them had dropped out of high school and before joining the com any never thought they would earn more than a dollar a day.
As impor ant as the money is for them, the confidence and the new sense of what s possible that it gives them are equally valuable.
"It is not one of us dom nating the other," said Hockenstein.
"It is real collaboration that is reating better futures for the people at the bottom and the top."
ot surprisingly, as news of the program spread, Hockenstein and is partners began getting calls from people in Mongolia, Pakistan, ran, and Jordan who wanted to provide IT services to the world.
In mid2004, a client approached Digital Divide Data to digitize an EnglishArabic dictionary.
Around the same time, Hockenstein's office received n unsolicited e-mail from a company in Iran that was running a dataentry firm there.
"They found us through a Google search," said Hocken tein.
He asked the Iranians whether they could do an English-Arabic ictionary, even though the language of Iran is Farsi, which uses some ut not all of the same letters as Arabic.
"He said they could," said ockenstein, "so we partnered on a joint project for this client to digi ize an Arabic dictionary."
hat I like most about the story, and why it is so telling of the flat orld, is Hockenstein's kicker: "I still have never met the guy [in Iran].
e did the whole deal over Yahoo!
instant messenger and e-mail.
We ired him the money through Cambodia .
I invited him to my wed ing, but he wasn't able to come."
oday, Hockenstein pointed out' "you're just one degree from any ne or anything."
Reflecting on his and his partner's experience in start ng Digital Divide Data, he added: "Two people and a computer were ble to create better lives for three hundred people .
Two people and a eb site can now do anything."
o one assigned Hockenstein to go to Cambodia.
No one paid him o go, either.
He just went.
"We showed up in Phnom Penh not knowing  person, rented an apartment, and knocked on doors," said Hock- F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G nstein.
"And twenty-four hours later we were in the office of the person ho had brought the Internet to Cambodia and was searching for a way o create jobs."
So I asked him: "If you were counseling young people to ay, what would you tell them?
Go to work for an NGO?
The World ank?
A charity?
Or business school?"
True sustainability depends on market solutions," Hockenstein eplied.
"There are hundreds of NGOs training people to use computers nd subsidizing the [enterprise].
But when the money runs out, only a ery small fraction of these people are able to create any kind of liveli ood for themselves on their own.
Most in Cambodia had to go back to heir family farms or sex trafficking."
When you are trying to root out omething like sex trafficking or drug harvesting, "you need alternative conomic opportunities to solve it permanently, if you are talking about arge numbers of people.
We have rescued twenty women in Cambodia ho now work at our place and have not had to go back to their previous ives.
Many others have had to go back [to sex work] to earn a living."
f course, the vast majority of people in Cambodia remain poor and isadvantaged.
That is old.
What is new is the emergence of home rown Cambodian and Laotian engines to make Cambodia and Laos ess poor.
There are still miles to go, but you have to start somewhere.
ockenstein's advice to college grads: "Young people find it hard to et involved with meaningful work even when they want to do some hing which matters.
One reason is they are waiting for the corporate re ruiters who come on campus to sit down and offer them a job which hanges the world.
Instead, consulting firms and investment banks show p. Don't wait for the recruiter from HR to come on campus to interview ou.
Get together the money for a plane ticket yourself."
o teachers from opposite sides of the globe decided that they ould take advantage of the flat world to teach about collaboration n a totally different wayand they did so without waiting for any ad inistrator to change their curricula or direct them from above.
I hap ened to come across the work of Julie Lindsay, from the International chool Dhaka, in Bangladesh, and Vicki Davis, from Westwood Schools  H E W O R L D IS F L A T n Camilla, Georgia, while surfing the Web.
They were using this book n their courses, and their goal was to teach their respective high school tudents about the flat world by allowing them to experience its various spects on their own.
When Vicki posted on her blog comments about her students' views f the book [The World Is Flat], I knew we had a match," Lindsay re alled.
"By reading the blogs of other teachers, I realized that I could flat en the world by going directly to other teachers with common curricular urposes, and this is just what we did."
dded Davis: "When Julie contacted me, I knew that our projectbased learning environment would mesh well with Julie's, and we im ediately created a wiki and began planning" an educational joint enture.
he Flat Classroom Project (http://flatclassroomproject.wikispaces com) took six weeks to plan and lasted for two weeks.
Students from the lass in Bangladesh and the class in Georgia were partnered and given he task to create a wiki page (a common Web page whose "members" an upload and edit content) based on one of the ten flatteners.
To do his effectively, the students communicated regularly over the Internet, hared resources (photographs, music, and the like), and planned their roject as if they were literally face-to-face in one classroom.
They xperienced the flatteners firsthand.
Some students, for example, "out ourced" portions of their video presentation to their international part er, their teachers explained to me.
The time difference was a challenge, ith the two teachers often instant-messaging each other in the early orning or late at night.
The students were never in the same classroom, n the same continent, or in the same time zone at the same time.
he students moved seamlessly among many types of software, hard are, and Web applications to create an effective Web presentation on heir topic, the teachers said in a joint e-mail they sent me.
These in luded "a central wiki, wiki discussion areas for conversation and teacher eedback, and RSS feeds to monitor changes.
Students and teachers also sed VoIP (Skype), IM chat, MySpace (to connect), Evoca (to share au io), YouTube, Google Video, Dropload (to transfer files), and many ther resources to collaborate."
In one instance, the teachers said, two F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G tudents who called themselves "The C Team" (their names were Casey nd Cannelle), tackled the topic of "virtual communications."
indsay and Davis agreed that social networking has great potential or learning and inspiring global collaboration.
"This project also created riendships across the world and promoted a cultural understanding that s needed in our world today," they said.
"We may be from opposite sides f the world, but our students became one class tethered by invisible trings of bits and bytes."
hen I asked Lindsay and Davis what they learned from doing this,  got an earful: "Students are hungering for meaningful connections ith one another.
They want to understand if the stereotypes portrayed y much of the mass media are true and they want to connect and decide or themselvesthus the explosive growth of sites like MySpace and ouTube.
This ability to connect has largely been ignored and blocked y many in the educational community who would rather maintain the ntrenched style of a classroom that has been around for over a hundred ears.
But there are some educators creating safe, meaningful, engaging flat' online projects and collaboratives who are experiencing incredible esults in their classrooms and sharing it with one another."
ot only did the projects give the students "intentional knowledge"  nowledge the teacher intends for them to learnthey also gain the unintentional" knowledge that comes with the experience of collabo ating with people halfway across the world.
"We build relational bridges hat the students of tomorrow can walk across," the two teachers ex lained.
"We've connected the technology; now it is truly time to con ect the people."
t is heartening to see educators now bypassing traditional intermedi ries to share resources, best practices, and information.
Teachers inter sted in learning how to do more can contact flatclassroomproject mail.com.
me other social entrepreneurs are now using the flat-world platform o try to improve government in the United States, because they un erstand that this new platform gives a whole new power to grassroots ac-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ivists in a democracyas opposed to party machines or big media.
onsider my friend Andrew Rasiej, a former music promoter who ounded MOUSE.org to bring more technology to New York City chools and who, in 2005, was a Democratic candidate for New York ity's Office of Public Advocate a city ombudsman who is supposed to old the mayor accountable on community relations and investigates omplaints about everything from potholes to city services.
I met Rasiej uring his campaign, when he was trying to get attention for his proposal hat New York City provide universal Wi-Fi infrastructure, so anyone nywhere could get access to high-speed Internet and cell phone cover ge.
His candidacy ultimately failed.
He was ahead of his time.
But even ually, time will catch up to him.
he old industrial approach to politics, argued Rasiej, "is one to any."
That is, we elect someone who will solve our problems for us.
he new model in business is that you involve your community and cus omers in an ongoing conversation about every aspect of your business, rom the moment you conceive a product, to how you design it, to the upply chain that builds it and delivers it, to the way you collect and ab orb customer feedback and respond more quickly to changing tastes.
Well, the time is here to apply the same principlethe power of anyto reinventing civic life and reinvigorating our democracy," in isted Rasiej.
"Not only are you improving city services and the quality of ife, but you are giving people a way to participate in the decisions that af ect their lives in a way that is easy and where they see the results."
asiej proposed the creation of a Web site where any citizen using his r her cell phone could take a picture of a pothole, any dangerous bro en railing, or even a suspected crime and immediately e-mail it to City all or post it on the official Web site, so every citizen, in effect, becomes  potential ombudsman.
Two years later, New York City started imple enting just such a program.
asiej believes that 2004 Democratic presidential candidate Howard ean accidentally discovered the power of the network when he started nline fund-raising in his failed bid for the White House, but never had  chance to follow it up.
"Dean did not realize that the money that was lowing into his campaign, via the Internet, was actually the by-product F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G f the vibrant community of Democratic and angry anti-Bush and anti ar voters who were talking to each other and propelling his candi acy," said Rasiej.
Neither did any other candidate; no one tried to run  flat campaign in 2004.
But trust me, in the near future candidates will igure this out.
There is an iron law in American politics: The party that ost quickly absorbs and adopts the latest technology dominates poli ics.
FDR dominated the radio through the fireside chat; JFK tri mphed over Nixon in televised debates; Republicans rose to power on alk radio; and Karl Rove mastered the use of direct mail and comput rized databases.
The next technological political model will revolve round the power of community and individual uploading.
In this odel, the public officeholder will no longer be the one who promises o solve the problems of the many.
Rather, he or she will become a hub f connectivity for the many to work with the many, creating networks f public advocates to identify problems, solve them, and get behind andidates who are ready to mobilize the government and the people in he right direction.
One elected official [alone] cannot solve the problems of eight mil ion people," said Rasiej, "but eight million people networked together an solve one city's problems.
They can spot and offer solutions better nd faster than any bureaucrat.
The party that stakes out this new frontier is the party that will be he majority party in the twenty-first century," Rasiej argues.
"And the emocrats had better understand something: Their base right now is the ost disconnected from the network."
emocracy in America is changing, and it was with this change in ind that Rasiej joined with former Nation editor Micah Sifry to form ww.personaldemocracy.com.
They write: "A new force, rooted in new ools and practices built on and around the Internet, is rising alongside he old system of capital-intensive broadcast politics... Networked oices are reviving the civic conversation.
More people, every day, are iscovering this new power.
After years of being treated like passive sub ects of marketing and manipulation, they want to be heard.
Members xpect a say in the decision-making process of the organizations they oin.
Readers want to talk back to the news-makers.
Citizens are insisting  H E W O R L D IS F L A T n more openness and transparency from government.
All the old insti utions and playersbig money, top-down parties, big-foot journalism, loistered organizationsmust adapt or face losing status and power.
ersonal democracy, where everyone is a full participant, is coming."
ust look at how Virginia's Senator George Allen was caught on video sing the term "macaca" to dismiss a young critican insult that was up oaded to the Internet, where it fatally wounded his reelection campaign.
uture elections, note Rasiej and Sifry, are sure to be even further affected y the scope and reach of the Internet, "with all kinds of voter-generated ontent, citizen activism, social networks, and the power of the technol gy to force transparency in the electoral process and in government."
lls simply aren't what they used to be even for kings and ueensand this change is opening new opportunities for politi al activism where it was previously unimaginable.
A vivid example of this as described by William Wallis in the Financial Times (November 24, 006).
Writing from Manama, Bahrain, Wallis reported that "[s]ince ahrain's government blocked the Google Earth Web site earlier this year or its intrusion into private homes and royal palaces, Googling their is and kingdom has become a national pastime for many Bahrainis."
ahrain is a tiny island state off the east coast of Saudi Arabia.
About 0 per cent of Bahrain's population are Shiite Muslims, but the ruling alKhalifa family are Sunnis.
The Bahraini Shiites have long insisted on a reater share of wealth and power.
"Opposition activists claim that 80 per ent of the island has been carved up between royals and other private andlords, while much of the rest of the population faces an acute hous ng shortage," added Wallis.
The site allows Internet users to view satellite images of the world in arying degrees of detail.
When Google updated its images of Bahrain to igher definition, cyber-activists seized on the view it gave of estates and rivate islands belonging to the ruling al-Khalifa family to highlight the nequity of land distribution in the tiny Gulf kingdom," Wallis explained.
senior government official told Wallis that Google Earth "had allowed he public to pry into private homes and ogle people's motor yachts and F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G wimming pools.
But he acknowledged that the government's three-day ttempt to block the site had proved counterproductive.
It gave instant ublicity to Google Earth and contributed to growing sophistication mong Bahrainis in circumventing web censorship.
It also provided ore ammunition to democracy activists ahead of [the 2006] parlia entary elections.
the second since King Hamad bin Issa al-Khalifa egan introducing limited political reforms in 2001."
allis explained: "Mahmood al-Yousif, a businessman whose politi al chat and blog site Mahmood's Den is among Bahrain's most popular, ays that in the tense run-up to the polls, few Bahrainis have not surfed ver the contours of their kingdom, comparing vast royal palaces, marinas nd golf courses with crowded Shia villages nearby, where unemploy ent is rife and services meagre.
For those with insufficient bandwidth o access Google Earth, a PDF file with dozens of downloaded images f royal estates has been circulated anonymously by e-mail.
Mr Yousif, mong others, initially encouraged web users to post images on photosharing websites.
'Some of the palaces take up more space than three or our villages nearby and block access to the sea for fishermen.
People new this already.
But they never saw it.
All they saw were the surround ng walls,' said Mr Yousif, who is seen in Bahrain as the grandfather of its logging community.
He and other activists believe creative use of the Internetconnec ivity in Bahrain is among the highest in the Arab worldis forcing the ountry to confront awkward realities and will speed the march towards  more egalitarian society.
But loyalists find irreverent discussion of the oyal family on the Web offensive and dangerous.
While some younger embers of the royal family apparently saw the futility of blocking oogle Earth and reversed it quickly, others in government have waged  virtual battle with the nation's proliferating cyber-activists using tech ology as well as an arsenal of press censorship laws .
'There are some n the government who are still living in the age of the telex, when you ould very easily put controls on communications.
But these Orwellian olicing methods do not have a place in this modern age,' says Mr ousif."
s they have been for generations, all of these Bahraini royal palaces  H E W O R L D IS F L A T re surrounded by high walls, keeping people from looking inside.
And hen along came Google Earth.
It flattened all the walls, and suddenly veryone could look insideand act on what they saw.
ile covering the Arab-Israeli conflict, I learned that the way ou get big change is by getting the big players to do the right hing for the wrong reasons.
That is, if you wait for everyone to do the ight things for the right reasons, you can wait forever.
This approach eally underpins another kind of social entrepreneurship being made ossible by the flat world activists partnering with the world's largest ultinational corporations to get them to change their business prac ices, with far-reaching effects.
n the flat world, the balance of power between global companies nd the individual communities in which they operate is tilting more nd more in favor of the companies, many of them American-based.
hese companies command as much if not more power than many gov rnments, not only to create value but also to transmit values.
The desire f corporations to avoid being the target of global protest in a flat world as made them much more open to working with social and environ ental activists, who are collaborating with progressive companies in ways hat can make the companies more profitable and the flat earth more ivable.
et me illustrate this notion with a couple of examples.
If you think bout the forces that are gobbling up biodiversity around the planet, no orce is more powerful than farming.
So how and where the big food roducers farm and fish really matters as to whether we manage to pre erve natural habitats and species.
Conservation International, one of the iggest environmental NGOs in the world, has as its main mission pre erving biodiversity.
It is also a big believer in trying, when possible, to ollaborate with big business, because when you bring a major global layer around, it can have a huge impact on the environment.
In 2002, cDonald's and Conservation International forged a partnership to use he McDonald's global supply chaina behemoth that sucks beef, fish, hicken, pork, bread, lettuce, pickles, tomatoes, and potatoes from all F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G our corners of the flat world to produce not just monetary value but lso different values about the environment.
"We and McDonald's ooked at a set of environmental issues and said, 'Here are the things the ood suppliers could do to reduce the environmental impact at little or o cost,'" explained Glenn Prickett, senior vice president of Conser ation International.
cDonald's then met with its key suppliers and worked out, with hem and with CI, a set of guidelines for what McDonald's calls "socially esponsible food supply."
"For conservationists, the challenge is how do ou get your arms around hundreds of millions of decisions and decision akers involved in agriculture and fisheries, who are not coordinated in ny way except by the market," said Prickett.
"So what we look for are artners who can put their purchasing power behind a set of environ entally friendly practices in a way that is good for them, works for the roducers, and is good for biodiversity.
In that way, you can start to cap ure so many more decision makers.. .
There is no global government uthority to protect biodiversity.
You have to collaborate with the players ho can make a difference, and one of them is McDonald's."
onservation International is already seeing improvements in con ervation of water, energy, and waste, as well as steps to encourage better anagement of fisheries, among McDonald's suppliers.
But it is still arly, and one will have to assess over a period of years, with compre ensive data collection, whether this is really having a positive impact on he environment.
This form of collaboration cannot and should never e a substitute for government rules and oversight.
But if it works, it an be a vehicle for actually getting government rules implemented.
nvironmentalists who prefer government regulation to these more ollaborative efforts often ignore the fact that strong rules imposed gainst the will of farmers end up being weakly enforcedor not en orced at all.
hat is in this for McDonald's?
It is a huge opportunity to improve its lobal brand by acting as a good global citizen.
Conservation International as struck similar supply-chain collaborations with Starbucks, setting ules for its supply chain of coffee farmers, and Office Depot, with its upply chain of paper-product providers.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T hat these collaborations do is start to "break down the walls be ween different interest groups," said Prickett.
Normally you would have he environmentalists on one side and the farmers on the other and each ide trying to get the government to write the regulations in the way that ould serve it.
Government would end up writing the rules largely to enefit business.
"Now, instead, we have a private entity saying, 'We want o use our global supply chain to do some good, but we understand that o be effective it has to be a collaboration with the farmers and the envi onmentalists if it is going to have any impact,' " Prickett said.
ollowing his work with McDonald's, Prickett turned his attention to al-Mart, the world's biggest retailer.
Conservation International is work ng with Wal-Mart's executives to think about their environmental foot rint and create a strategy to turn that from a negative to a positivefrom ow they use energy to the packaging of the products they sell to how hose products are produced around the world.
What is exciting about working with Wal-Mart is that it is the world's argest retailer," said Prickett, "and when you start to impact its supply hain in terms of the standards it expects its suppliers to adopt, you are alking about more than sixty thousand suppliers across every merchan ise supply chain and around the world.
What is also exciting about WalMart is the signal it sends to the business community at large.
It tells ther CEOs that if the world's largest retailer has taken this seriously, here must be something to it.
And suddenly green' becomes an accept ble business strategy.
We have already seen that begin to empower indi iduals in big companies who have had great green ideas for their supply hains but have never had the executive-level mandate to act on them.
ow they do either because they are a Wal-Mart supplier and have to o green, or because they have experienced the Wal-Mart effect and heir bosses are saying, 'Hey, there is something to this.'
Suddenly with al-Mart going green, you are putting the green movement on Main treet.
Ultimately that will have a political impact.
It is the democ atization of sustainability.
It is not just an elite cause for people on the oasts anymore"."
similar movement has been under way for a while in the consumer lectronics world, with an HP-Dell-IBM alliance.
In October 2004, F IT'S N O T H A P P E N I N G hese three giants joined forces, in a collaborative effort with key mem ers of their computer and printer supply chains, to promote a unified ode of socially responsible manufacturing practices across the world.
he new Electronics Industry Code of Conduct includes bans on bribes, hild labor, embezzlement and extortion, and violations of intellectual roperty; rules governing usage of wastewater, hazardous materials, ollutants; and regulations on the reporting of occupational injuries.
everal major electronics manufacturers who serve the IBM, Dell, and P supply chains collaborated on writing the code, including Celestica, lextronics, Jabil, Sanmina-SCI, and Solectron.
ompliance is everything, and so, again, it remains to be seen just ow vigilant the corporations will be with their suppliers.
Nevertheless, his use of supply chains to create valuesnot just value could be a ave of the future.
As we have begun to look to other [offshore] suppliers to do most of ur manufacturing, it has become clear to us that we have to assume ome responsibility for how they do that work," explained Debra Dunn, P's senior vice president of corporate affairs and global citizenship.
irst and foremost, that is what many of HP's customers want.
Customers care," said Dunn, "and European customers lead the way in aring.
And human rights groups and NGOs, who are gaining increasing lobal influence as trust in corporations declines, are basically saying, ou guys have the power here.
You are global companies, you can set ex ectations that will influence environmental practices and human rights ractices in emerging markets.'"
hose voices are right, and what is more, they can use the Internet to rive the point home to companies that don't get it.
When you have the procurement dollars that HP and McDonald's ave," said Dunn, "people really want to do business with you, so you ave leverage and are in a position to set standards, and [therefore] ou have a responsibility to set standards.
We used to say that as long s we complied with the local law, that was all we could be expected to o.
But now the imbalance of power is so huge it is not practical to say hat Wal-Mart or HP can do whatever they want as long as a state gov rnment or country does not stop them.
The leverage HP would leave on  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he table would be immoral given its superior power.
We have the ower to transmit global governance to our universe of suppliers and em loyees and consumers, which is a pretty broad universe."
have no doubt that plenty of abuse remains in electronics factories n the developing worldparticularly in China even in those produc ng for the likes of HP, Dell, and IBM.
But I also have no doubt that pro rams like the Electronics Industry Code of Conduct create a baseline hat give labor activists a much more powerful club to wield in pressing or improved working conditions.
The key is enforcement.
And the key o enforcement is for social entrepreneurs to educate consumers to the act that they have power, that their buying decisions and buying power re political tools and they need to use them.
t is it a sell-out for social entrepreneurs to try to change the world hrough markets rather than marches?
I posed that question to Rob atson, chairman and C E O of EcoTech International.
Watson grew up n the environmental movement, was one of the most respected environ entalists working on China, but eventually decided to go to business chool and start a company.
When I asked him why, he sent me the fol owing e-mail, titled "What I Learned in Business School."
It is an impor ant message: hat would possess a 43-year-old father to abandon an extremely uccessful 20-plus-year career in the non-profit world for a twoyear slog through business school and the trauma of starting a new usiness halfway around the world?
My life has always been about oing the greatest good for the greatest number.
I have chosen to ocus my efforts on protecting the environment, which is the un erpinning of human existence on the Earth.
For me it has always een about the mission, with organizations being the means to hat end.
For over twenty years that organization was the non rofit Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), one of the orld's most effective environmental advocacy groups.
At NRDC  had the good fortune to have worked on four continents helping F IT'S NOT H A P P E N I N G overnments and businesses create policies, programs and proj cts that help the environment.
As a founding member and vol nteer for the U.S. Green Building Council, I founded the EED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) green uilding rating system, which due to the dedication of hun reds of volunteers like myself and tireless efforts of the USGBC taffhas become the premier green building certification sys em in the world.
Without a doubt I had made a difference.
et, my experience in the field made me realize that I needed o chart a different course.
For many years when people came to e at NRDC for advice about how to get involved and make a dif erence with the environment, invariably they would ask me o which law program or environmental science program they hould apply.
Instead, I would recommend that people go to usiness school.
My advice was based on my belief that the legal nd regulatory frameworks for environmental protection largely ave been established.
Given our current situation, I realized that ow it was about diffusion and implementationand implemen ation is where business excels.
This belief coupled with the sim le fact that there were far more environmental lawyers and cientists floating around than environmental businessmen and hat green business was needed to put environmental protection n the ground.
felt that the main reason mainstream business continues to e a cause of environmental problems instead of its solution is hat business-as-usual continues to use 19th-century economics nd 20th-century engineering when trying to solve 21st-century roblems.
I saw the need for new green frameworks for busi esswhere the clean path is the most profitable.
Economics, fi ance and accounting are human laws and can be changed nlike, say, gravity, which is a natural lawone that applies to all pecies, not just one.
We need to realign these human laws with atural law unless we want to be a bad biological experiment on he planet.
I felt that as a (hopefully to be successful) businessperson I could make the case for this paradigm shift more effectively  H E W O R L D IS F L A T han as a non-profit environmental advocate.
But to be an effec ive change agent, I felt I needed to know something about the ystem I was trying to change.
So Ifinallytook my own advice and ent to Columbia Business School.
Over the course of my MBA rogram I learned or reaffirmed three main things: .
Doing business well is very, very hard.
Few people do business well.
The conceptual frameworks and tools underlying the conduct f today's business are hopelessly outdatedas noted above.
think the process of establishing a new business framework ill be one of learning by doingwhere theory and observation lay off each other to create a truly sustainable way of providing eople with what they want.
As a first step, we need to get the arket and regulatory polemicists off each other's back.
Both are ight and both are wrong: markets and regulations each are nec ssary, but not sufficient.
Good regulation makes markets work roperly and removes the worst actors, while markets stimulate in ovation and efficient delivery of goods and services.
My goal in oing to business school and switching hats from the non-profit to he business sector is to be a model for a new paradigm where usiness can effectively and efficiently operate on a large scale for he betterment of humankind.
Wish me luck.
ood luck, Rob.
As for the rest of you, well, like I said, if it's not hap ening, it's because you're not doing it.
OURTEEN hat Happens When We ll Have Dog's Hearing?
the fall of 2006 I took a reporting/book-promotion trip to Germany nd France.
The night I arrived at Paris's Charles de Gaulle Inter ational Airport I was met by a driver sent by my French publisher.
A oung man of African descent, the driver was carrying a sign with my ame on it, and as I approached him I noticed that he was talking to imself, in French, very animatedly.
As I got closer, I realized he had a luetooth wireless phone clipped to his ear and was deep in conversa ion with someone else.
I pointed at myself as the person he was sup osed to meet.
He nodded and went on talking to whoever was on the ther end of his phone.
When my luggage arrived, I grabbed it off the elt; he pointed toward the exit and I followed while he kept talking.
hen we got into the car, I said, "Do you know my hotel?"
He said, Non."
I showed him the address on a piece of paper, and he went back o talking on the phone.
After the car started to roll, I saw that he had a ovie playing on the little flat screen in the dashboard, the one that usu lly displays the GPS road map.
I noticed this because I was in the back eat trying to finish writing a column on my laptop, and between the ound of his talking on the phone and the soundtrack of the movie, I ould barely concentrate.
When I had written all that I could, I got out y iPod, put in the earphones, and zoned out on a Stevie Nicks al umwhile the driver went on talking, steering, and watching the ovie.
As we arrived at my hotel, I reflected on our trip: He and I had een together for an hour, and between the two of us we had been doing  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ix different things.
He was driving, talking on his phone, and watching  movie.
I was riding, working on my laptop, and listening to my iPod.
here was only one thing we never did: talk to each other.
fs a pity.
He probably had a lot to tell me.
When I related all this to y friend Alain Frachon, a senior editor at Le Monde, he quipped, "I uess the era of foreign correspondents quoting taxi drivers is over!"
Alain eant the old-school opinion pieces that invariably began, "As my Paris axi driver said to me about the French elections..." Well, you can for et about reading columns starting that way anymore.
My Paris taxi river was too busy to say hello, let alone opine on politics; and I was too usy finishing a column I'd started on the plane to pay full attention to y new surroundings.
es, technology can make the far feel very near.
But it can also make he near feel very far.
For all I know, the driver was talking to his parents omewhere in Africa.
How wonderful!
But that meant the two of us ouldn't talk at all.
And we were sitting two feet away from each other.
hen I shared this story with Linda Stone, the technologist who labeled he disease of the Internet age "continuous partial attention"two eople doing six things, devoting only partial attention to each oneshe emarked to me, "We're so accessible, we're inaccessible.
We can't find he off switch on our devices or on ourselves.
We want to wear an iPod as uch to listen to our own playlists as to block out the rest of the world nd protect ourselves from all that noise.
We are everywhere except here we actually are physically."
month before my visit to Paris, I was in San Francisco.
I was stand ng at an intersection waiting to cross the street when a man jogging and earing an iPod came up next to me.
As soon as the light turned green e sprinted into the crosswalk.
But a woman driving a carrunning a ellow lightalmost hit him before she hit the brakes.
She was holding  cell phone to her right ear and driving with her left hand.
I thought to yself, "I've just witnessed the first postmodern local news story," and I mmediately crafted the lead in my head: "A woman driving her car hile speaking on her cell phone ran over a man jogging across the street hile listening to his iPod.
See page 6."
hese encounters illustrate a few of the many social downsides of all  H A T H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
he connectivity that has helped to flatten the worldand those down ides are what I want to explore in this chapter.
By social downsides, I do ot mean things like Osama bin Laden using a cell phone or terrorist etworks setting up Web sites.
I mean the social downsides for you and e, our children and neighbors, strangers and friends, and the effects all his new connectivity is having on our interactions and public life.
he very technologies that are uniting us are also clearly dividing us.
he same technologies that allow us to connect with each other as never efore also allow us to interrupt each other as never before.
The technolo ies that are empowering individuals to upload their own contentthrough logs, podcasts, and instant messagingand to inscribe themselves on the orld also contribute to a coarsening of our language and the dumbing own of our discourse.
And most troubling, but still not yet fully under tood, is what happens when we can all not only author our own content nd upload it globally, but, thanks to improved connectivity and search ngines, read all the content people are authoring about us.
What hap ens when the Internet becomes so ubiquitous and search engines so re ined that we can all suddenly hear everything whispered about us?
hat happens when we all have dog's hearing?
t's look at each of these issues.
The real meaning of what happened ith my Paris driver is that every new technology or toy that con ects us more easily divides us more easilyand you can now see and eel that everywhere.
Our family has gone skiing in Colorado over hristmas for twenty-five years.
Riding on the lift or in the big gondola ar with strangers was always fun, because you never knew whom you ight be paired with on a long ride up the mountain.
Often the person as a foreigner and you could actually learn something from a chance ncounter on the chairlift.
Now it is almost standard that the minute you et into the gondola someone in the cabin will whip out a cell phone nd your chances of having a conversation with him or her, or with any ne else in the car, for that matter, are zero.
Who hasn't sat on a train be ind a person who is talking on the phone and been forced to listen to he conversation, which is often so personalabout money, family or a  H E W O R L D IS F L A T elationshipthat you can't believe this person is broadcasting it to a unch of strangers?
I am amazed at the personal things people will say oudly into a cell phone that they would never even whisper to a stranger f they were just sitting next to him or her.
o wonder people have to do online dating: Your chances of a hance encounter now on a ski lift or on a train or a bus are so much ower today than they used to be, because the chances that the person sit ing next to you will be absorbed in a handheld device, rather than being pen to engaging the person next to him or her, are so much higher.
eetings, too, are not what they used to be, not when half the people in he room are checking their PalmPilots and BlackBerrys under the table, hile they occasionally nod their head at you or glance your way.
henever I am in a group meeting around a conference table, I want to tart by saying: "All right everybody, both hands on the table.
I want to ee all ten of your fingers at all times.
No BlackBerrys allowed."
It is the nly hope you have of them listening to you.
love having lots of contacts and easy connectivity, but in an age hen so many people you knowand even more you don't knowcan ontact you, I'm finding this more and more disconcerting.
I call it "the ge of Interruption," because it really is an age of constant interrup ionsunless you totally unplug.
We have gone from the Iron Age to the ndustrial Age to the Information Age to the Age of Interruption.
All we o now is interrupt each other (and ourselves) with these instant mes ages, e-mail, or cell phone calls.
And when someone isn't deliberately nterrupting you, someone else is accidentally doing it with a ringing cell hone, jangling you with Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture, while you are rying to nap or write on the train.
Who can think or innovate under such onditions?
I know that connectivity means productivity.
But it is possi le to overdose, to reach a point where connectivity leads to so many in erruptions that it stifles our creativity.
Indeed, one wonders whether the ge of Interruption will lead to a decline in civilization as ideas and ttention spans shrink and we all get diagnosed with some version of at ention deficit disorder.
fter writing a column about this, I was inundated with reader com ents.
One of my favorites was a letter from Elizabeth Winthrop of HAT H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
illiamstown, Mass., who wrote: "Friends laugh when I tell them that as  novelist I am looking for a shack in the woods where I can completely nplug.
Otherwise, how will I ever be able to get still enough to hear the ext character talking to me when cell phones are ringing and e-mail is alling and the Web, that ever-present temptress, is wooing me?"
know how she feels.
I often feel that I was much smarter when I ould do only one thing at a time, and I know that I am not alone in that eeling.
One day in the fall of 2006,1 was trying to track down my friend aron Ezrahi in Jerusalem to ask him a question.
I kept calling his cell hone and getting no answer.
I eventually reached him at home.
"Yaron, hat's wrong with your cell phone?"
I asked.
It was stolen a few months ago," he answered, adding that he de ided not to replace it because its ringing was constandy breaking his oncentration.
"Since then, the first thing I do every morning is thank he thief and wish him a long life."
hile the cell phone had made Yaron more mobile, it also had made im more distracted.
Suddenly, his office was tethered to him wherever e went, like a ball and chain.
That level of connectivity may be very use ul if you are a stockbroker, but not if you're a thinker, a professor, or an uthor.
When you're always connected, you're always "in."
You're never out."
Out is over.
The only way really to get out of your office now is oth to walk out the door and turn off every mobile device you own.
he fact that technology allows us to access, create, and receive ore and more information doesn't mean that our minds can absorb it ll.
Moore's Law applies to microchips, but not to the human brain.
Our apacity to process and analyze information doesn't double every twentyfour months.
Some days I look at all the e-mail waiting in my computer nd I just want to delete it allwithout reading a word.
I feel like the roverbial glass that is already full but that someone is still constantly ouring water into.
There is so much information coming at us now, we ind it harder and harder to set prioritiesto separate the merely insis ent from the truly important.
There is no clerk down the hall to sort it all ut for you.
Now everyone is their own mailroomwhich is fine, except hat I have another job.
ou don't appreciate just how liberating getting away can be until you  H E W O R L D IS F L A T eally go cold turkey.
In June 2006, after touring the Peruvian rain fo est, I was left with two especially strong impressions.
First, I was struck y what an incredibly violent place the rain forest is, with trees, plants, nd vines all struggling with each other for sunlight, and animals, in ects, and birds doing the same for food.
But I was also struck by how dis onnected it is.
Yes, I had to go to the Tambopata Research Center, deep n the Peruvian rain forest, to find it, but I can report there is still a place ith no Internet or cell phone service.
Of course, there are many such laces, but the fact that I had seen people using their cell phones from top the sacred Inca ruin of Machu Picchu two days earlier reminded e that there are fewer and fewer each day, even in the Andes.
There as something cleansing about spending four days totally disconnected.
t was the best possible antidote to Linda Stone's "continuous partial at ention."
aybe soon we'll have to artificially re-create the experience of being out."
Maybe soon we'll see ads for a Four Seasons resort that promises ot only beautiful beaches and beautiful roomsbut also no connectiv ty.
The ad might read: "We guarantee that every room comes WITH UT Internet service."
Or, "Our entire hotel is a cold zone.
We have no ot zones here, no wireless service available whatsoever."
You would urely return home better rested.
ur Peruvian rain forest guide, Gilbert, carried no handheld devices nd no cell phone and did not suffer from continuous partial attention.
ust the opposite.
He heard every chirp, whistle, howl, and crackle in the ain forest and would stop us in our tracks and immediately identify the ird, insect, or animal we were hearing.
He also had incredible vision nd never missed a spider's web, or a butterfly, or a toucan, or a column f marching termites.
He was totally disconnected from the Web but to ally in touch with the incredible web of life around him.
here's a lesson there.
o much connectivity may be bad not only for your peace of ind it may not be healthy for society as a whole.
When so many eople can upload and globalize their voice, their video, their blog, their  H A T H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
nstant messagewhen it is so easy to doit's also much more addictive or them and for us.
I am not sure it is good to have millions of people ad icted to a form of communication that, by its nature, is unedited, spon aneous, unfiltered, and uncensored.
There are some great bloggers and odcasters, who could be working anywhere, and the flat world has pened up wonderful new opportunities for them to emergeand even ake down a TXU.
I enjoy and respect their work.
But there are plenty of thers who either could really use an editor or should be keeping their houghts to themselvesor reading a book or taking a class, rather than logging and podcasting in their spare time.
hen Time magazine celebrated "You" (as in YouTube) as its Person f the Year for 2006, the magazine's cover package included a skeptical iece by NBC Nightly News anchor Brian Williams, a piece that raised his issue.
With all this emerging connectivity that is allowing everyone to log, or podcast, or instant-message his or her opinions or ideas whenever he urge strikes, Williams wrote, "The danger just might be that we miss he next great book or the next great idea, or that we fail to meet the next reat challenge .
because we are too busy celebrating ourselves."
In The ashington Post (December 21, 2006), columnist George F. Will also oured a dose of skepticism on this celebration of the power of "You" to uthor your own content.
Will wrote: "Richard Stengel, Time's manag ng editor, says, 'Thomas Paine was in effect the first blogger' and 'Ben ranklin was essentially loading his persona into the MySpace of the 8th century, "Poor Richard's Almanack.'"
Not exactly.
Franklin's extra rdinary persona informed what he wrote but was not the subject of what e wrote.
Paine was perhaps history's most consequential pamphleteer.
here are expected to be 100 million bloggers worldwide by the middle f 2007, which is why none will be like Franklin or Paine.
Both were ge iuses; genius is scarce."
nother effect of the Age of Interruption is the sheer corruption of he language that it brings about.
Now that we all are connected to each ther all the time, many people have too little time to spend on writing roperly.
No one ever wrote a great book with his thumbs, which is how any young people type SMSshort message servicetext messages n their cell phones.
The Washington Post's Lori Aratani, in a December  H E W O R L D IS F L A T 5, 2006, article, described how instant-messaging shorthand was creep ng into the essays of high school and college students.
Imagine what nglish prose is going to look like in ten years: oe Bambery, a senior at Walter Johnson High School in ethesda, might send more than 100 instant messagesI Ms uring a typical evening.
So during the SAT exam, the 18-yearold found herself inadvertently lapsing into IM-speak, using "b/c" nstead of "because" as she scrambled to finish her essay.
he caught herself and now is careful to proofread before hit ing print.
But she is hardly the only student to find IM phrases reeping into schoolwork.
They are using it absolutely everywhere," said Sara Good an, an English teacher at Clarksburg High School in Mont omery County, who has worn out many purple and red markers ircling the offending phrases in papers and tests.
endy Borelli, a seasoned English teacher at Springbrook igh in Silver Spring, finds photo captions for the school year ook sprinkled with shorthand such as "B4" and "nite."
A student ho left on a brief errand to the office announced he would BRB."
t's not just teenagers.
Some college professors say the lingo is opping up at their level as well.
eff Stanton, an associate professor in the school of informa ion sciences at Syracuse University, said sometimes he is taken back at how informal students have become in the way they ommunicate.
tanton shared one of his favorite pieces of correspondence: hi prof how are u culd u tell me my xm grade tim."
fter several weeks of grading papers filled with IM-speak and ther jargon, Goodman took matters into her own hands.
hen the students showed up for class the following day, she sked them to read a paragraph she had written using many of the ame phrases they used in their papers, "chaucer's the canterbury ales r a scathing attack on the catholic church of the late  H A T H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
3 0 0 s .
he uses the descriptions of many pilgrims (including everal very sketchy religious dawgs) 2 deliver a veiled message bout the mad corruption he like saw in the church the greed that ome of his characters have 4 money, represents like the use of hurch scratch 2 build some pretty tight cathedrals."
he said they laughed but understood her point.
ere is one other social downside I worry about in this Age of nterruption: What happens when we can all not only rant or whis er anything we want in our MySpace blog or podcast, but also hear verything ranted or whispered about us?
hat do I mean?
Millions of people today are blogging, podcasting, nd creating video content for YouTube or their own MySpace or acebook or Yahoo!
Groups or Friendster or Flickr or Second Life sites, r just writing for online newspapers or magazines.
Beyond the sheer mateur-hour quality of a lot of this content, it is bringing some trou ling social and legal issues our way much faster than weor our legal ystemsare ready to handle.
f you are any kind of public figure todayin politics, sports, enter ainment, education, media, business, or governmentchances are that omeone out there somewhere is blogging about you right now.
And if ou want to find out what people are saying, all you have to do is type our name into Google or Technorati.com and hit Search.
As I write hese words, in April 2007, Google's search engine brings up 60,100,000 eferences to the phrase "The World Is Flat."
I confess, there was a time hen I would use Google to see what was being written about this book.
don't anymore.
While many references are neutral or full of praise, oth rs are vitriolic or flat-out nuts.
s someone who works in the public eye and is used to criticism, I ave developed a thick skin.
You have to if you are going to be a colum ist.
But here's my question for you, dear reader: What happens when all our neighbors, or all your students, have blogs of their own?
Are you eady?
How thick is your skin?
Because when we are all publishers with ur own blogs, and when we are all broadcasters through YouTube, and  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hen we are all paparazzi thanks to our cell phone cameras, we are all ublic figures.
Everybody is fair game.
Everybody is news.
hat happens when one of your neighbors makes a nasty comment r uploads some embarrassing pictures of you into his or her MySpace o that now the whole world can see them, along with you?
What hap ens if your neighbor hears shouting and crashing dishes from your ouse one evening and writes in her MySpace blog, "The Johnsons had  wild fight last night.
I heard dishes breaking!"?
What if the truth is that ou have Greek ancestry and you and your husband like to celebrate irthdays by throwing dishes into the fireplace?
How do you get the misperception corrected after it has been sent all over the neighborhood and ll over the world?
e are already seeing some court cases arising around just such issues.
onsider this October 11, 2006, article from the technology news site rstechnica.com: The headline read, "Principal Sues Students, Parents ver MySpace Page."
The article, by Nate Anderson, began: "MySpace ill eventually be used to save the life of a cute puppy trapped in a well, nd the company will bask in the glow of some unusual good press.
But ntil that happens, we'll all have to settle for the more traditional stories of exual predators, online harassment, and school officials who see ySpace as little more than a filthy c a n c e r .
That's the case in Texas, here an assistant principal is suing two students and their parents over a ySpace page that depicted the administrator as a lesbian and contained obscene comments, pictures and graphics,' according to the court filing."
nderson went on to explain how the assistant principal at a San ntonio high school "had been forced to discipline [the two students] everal times, and was aware of their animosity to her, but apparently did ot suspect the lengths to which they would go to get a bit of revenge."
he two students, Anderson explained, set up a MySpace page in the rincipal's name that suggested she was a lesbian, which she was not.
urthermore, the page featured comments from other MySpace users ho knew the assistant principal.
These messages were also abusive.
ccording to the court filing, Anderson reported, a school official rought the page to the attention of the assistant principal, upsetting her.
The situation rattled the school administration enough that [the assistant rincipalis picture was removed from the school Web site and a brief ideo about the dangers of MySpace was posted instead.
What sets this ase apart from many other lawsuits filed over the content of blogs is that t doesn't target only the teenagers who created the site," wrote Anderson.
It also argues that the parents were guilty of negligence by failing to su ervise their children, and that they bear some of the responsibility for the efaming site.
The police were able to determine that the computers used o create the site were located in the students' homes, and [the] lawsuit ays that the parents have a duty to know what their children are up to."
his is just the beginning.
What Dov Seidman called "the dishonor ble accuser," or the malicious gossip, always had power to ruin some ne's life, but now that power has been magnified.
In the old days, you retty much had to be a movie star like Tom Cruise or a well-known olitician to worry about what strangers might say about you in print, and sually the worst that these celebrities had to worry about was a false or ex ggerated story in a supermarket tabloid like the National Enquirer.
But s the world has gotten flat, and we all have started to become public fig res to some degreeeven an assistant principal in Texaswe all need to e worried about bad press.
After all, what was the National Enquirer?
It as a tabloid newspaper, sold largely in supermarkets.
It had editors, re orters, and libel lawyers, all of whom knew something about journalism nd its limits, even if they often went right up to the lineand over it nce in a while.
And as outrageous as the National Enquirer might be, it as always accountable for what it wroteand could be held account ble in court, because it was published by a company whose address ould be found inside.
And while its reach was wide, it was only as wide s those who bought it or quoted it.
You could not easily buy a copy out ide of the United States.
As a tabloid, it was not archived by libraries and he like.
Once it was gone, it was gone, and the story often went with it.
ow fast-forward to today.
Thanks to the flattening of the world, we re all potential pornographers, yellow journalists, and paparazzi.
Almost o one has an editor or libel lawyer, and few people can be held ac ountable for the language or accuracy of the content they upload to the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T eb.
Most important of all, there are no longer any walls to contain what ou write or what is written about you.
Once it hits the Web, it goes orldwide.
oreover, the buyers of the National Enquirer had no easy way to onnect with one another, or, for that matter, with the tabloid's editors.
he information flow was basically one wayfrom the National En uirer to its readers.
Not anymore.
Now, not only can you broadcast by ourself globally without limits and without libel lawyers, but you can ink to other people who come to your Web site.
The dialogue is now wo-way and multidimensional.
hen people of like mind can connect this way easily, they can mo ilize each other and create an enormous echo effectfor things that re true and untrue, constructive and destructive.
If you visit extreme or arrowly defined Web sites or blogswhether they are racist or liberal, theist or environmentalist, radical Islamist or antiabortion Christian  ou will notice that many have a real virulence to their tone or language.
hat virulence is the sound of a self-selecting community talking to itself nd positively reinforcing itself, with no obligation to answer to anyone r look anyone in the eye.
Skinheads or violent Islamic radicals had to ex end a lot of energy to find each other in significant numbers twenty ears ago.
Now they can reinforce each other through the network and ever have to show up together at a public convention.
And just as urricane Katrina gained in virulence when it passed over the warm wa ers of the Gulf of Mexico before striking New Orleans, so these com unities gain in virulence from the warmth they draw by connecting ith one another.
he flat-world platform, alas, is a cheap, easy command-and-control ystem and network for any kind of organization or movement.
People in emocracies do not like to think about this, but we have put this system ut into the world and made it available to every good-hearted social en repreneur and every nut, no matter how small.
We gave them all a free, rivate, global channel on which to mobilize, reinforce each other, and et psychic rewards by seeing their threats, challenges, or good deeds roadcast worldwidewith virtually no checks.
Yes, the best bloggers  H A T H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
ill correct themselves and one another, as any newspaper's ombuds an does, but it is not systematic or uniform.
There are real penalties for ewspaper reporters who get caught fabricating or lying.
They are often uspended or lose their jobs.
There is no such system for the blogosphere.
You may lose readers or you may not.
But no one cuts off your andwidth for a month.
don't think we are ready for the boundaries between the public and rivate spheres to be erased so quickly.
The loss of privacy is going to be rofound.
I suspect it won't be long before people sit down at a dinner arty and the first thing the hostess declares is that "this evening will be log freeno one is allowed to blog about what is said here tonight."
Are e on the verge of parents telling their kids, "This conversation is off the ecord.
I don't want to read about this in your MySpace!"?
o, it won't be long.
The fact is that the world has gotten flat and more nterconnected much faster than people have developed the norms and thics to have their words go everywhere unedited and uncensored, and uch faster than people have adapted to hearing everything whispered bout them.
Democracy is great, but democracy without responsibility is ruly frightening.
hat to do?
The first rule is to develop a thicker skin.
This is the orld we live in now: Those who court the public eye with their achieve ents or their antics, and even many who don't court it at all, will have o learn to put up with more "digital stuff' being thrown at them by more eople from more places with fewer restraints and greater ease than ever efore.
nother rule: Try not to waste too much of your time reading this tuff.
"Internet addiction" afflicts adults and teenagers alike.
third rule might be: Keep it all in perspective.
Not all, but most of his "stuff" just becomes more noise in the massive global echo cham er.
And when there is so much noise out there, it eventually turns into hite noise.
And white noise, as anyone who goes to sleep with the air onditioner on knows, is its own kind of silence.
h, one more rule maybe the most important one: Let your kids now what world they are living in.
As individuals are able to create more  H E W O R L D IS F L A T f their own content in digital form, and as search engines and comput rs get better and better at sifting and storing all that digital content and elivering it back to us, the Internet will become a kind of permanent ecord, an always open book.
Every e-mail you send, every entry you ake in Facebook, in MySpace, or on YouTube is a digital footprint that ill never be washed away by the sea.
Every sound you make will soon e recorded somewhere.
And that means that young people not only ave to be smart about how they navigate around the Webthey have to e smart about what they leave behind there as well.
In time, Google, SN Search, and Yahoo!
will be able to turn over smaller and smaller ocks to find out smaller and smaller details about movie stars, scientific reakthroughs, crazy conspiracies and, yes, about you and your kids.
his is a new phenomenon.
But it will only intensify.
Therefore, parents nd teachers need to help young people understand that their reputa ions will start to be cast in cement at a much earlier age than previous enerations.
ov Seidman, the business ethicist, uses the simple example of the ersonal rsum, which college grads have used for years to apply for heir first job and for other jobs after that.
The rsum was a very efficient evice that society created to enable people to judge other people.
Most mportant, though, you got to write your own rsum, tell your own life tory the way you wanted it told, and it was generally accepted on faith unless or until proved otherwise) that what you said was honest and true.
hose days are over.
"Rsums are proxiesthey are documents where ou tell others about your life," notes Seidman.
"Proxies like that were ery efficient in a nontransparent world."
For someone else to check every actoid in your rsum was very difficult and expensive in a world with allsbut not in a flat world, not in the age of Google.
Now people can onduct their own X-ray of your life.
And if it is easy today, imagine how uch easier it will be in ten years.
"Now we can blow right past proxies, ike a rsum, and get a direct insight into you," said Seidman.
Employers no longer need a proxy to see into your life.
They can go to our MySpace page and see how you write and get to know your friends, earch the Web and see what youVe done, right and wrong, or evaluate HAT H A P P E N S W H E N W E A L L HAVE D O G ' S H E A R I N G ?
hat you said about yourself in your online yearbook.
They can recon truct these artifacts of your life, even after you have tried to delete them."
herefore, Seidman adds, "If character is destiny, and if strangers ave so many more tools to look inside your character now, then you bet er start building a solid character early," and that is a lesson educators eed to convey to young people.
he Washington Post reported (March 7, 2006) that many employers, ncluding law firms, were now doing Google searches as part of due dili ence checks on prospective employees.
"According to a December sur ey by the Ponemon Institute, a privacy research organization, roughly alf of U.S. hiring officials use the Internet in vetting job applications," he Posr reported.
"About one-third of the searches yielded content used o deny a job, the survey said.
The legal hiring market is very competi ive.
What could tip the balance is the appearance that a candidate is a ightning rod for controversy, said Mark Rasch, a Washington lawyer and onsultant who specializes in Internet issues."
This trend, the paper oted, has spawned a new service, ReputationDefender, "whose mission s to search for damaging content online and destroy it on behalf of lients.
Generally, the law exempts site operators from liability for the ontent posted by others, though it does not prevent them from remov ng offensive items.
Tor many people the Internet has become a scarlet etter, an albatross,' said Michael Fertik, ReputationDefender's chief ex cutive."
o momma, tell your kids: You will get fewer second chances in a flat orld.
"In this world you better do it right the first timeyou don't get to ick up and move to the next town to reinvent yourself so easily," said eidman.
If George W. Bush had been born and raised in this era, he ever would have been elected governor, let alone president.
Can you magine the digital footprintsthe cell phone camera photos he ould have left behind at Yale, a period of his life that he once summed p in the phrase, "When I was young and irresponsible, I was young and rresponsible"?
n the world where your history lives online forever, accessible to all, oted Seidman, "your reputation will follow you and precede you on  H E W O R L D IS F L A T our next stop.
It gets there before you do.
You don't get to spend four ears of college getting drunk.
Your reputation is getting set much earlier n life.
'Always tell the truth/ said Mark Twain, 'that way you won't have o remember what you said.'"
In a connected world, "how we conduct urselves matters more than ever," added Seidman.
"Not just avoiding mpeachable behaviors, but developing those that foster strong connec ions with others.
How we communicate, how we write letters, how we ay T m sorry' or don't say T m sorry,' how we engender trust or don't, how ell we collaborate, and what percentage of our promises do we keep  ll matter now more than ever."
o be sure, there are some upsides to all these social downsides.
People who get their hows right will see that it becomes a source of ower and strength," argues Seidman.
"They will be the ones getting head and enlisting others in their visions.
They will be the ones collab rating most with others to accomplish things that are difficult to do by hemselves .
This is a strategy for thriving that is available to everyone."
iving your life the right way, earning your reputation one achievement t a time, and building a solid foundation for your reputation is a win ing strategyeven when we all have dog's hearing.
nd yet when I add it all up, I do come out "net worried."
At its best, yberspace adds to the richness of the public debate and brings forward ew and valuable voices who might never have been heard from before.
ut at its worst, it brings forward more extreme and irresponsible voices ith fewer restraints and enables them to throw more spitballs farther nd bigger than ever before.
I worry that because of the latter, more and ore people will shun the public eye or public service for fear of falling nto this echo chamber, like a tumble dryer, and never escaping itor scaping so bruised and battered they never want to go near it again.
At a ime when democracies desperately need their best men and women eading public institutions, we want to make sure that our young people re running to the public sphere not away from it.
eopolitics and he Flat World IFTEEN he Unflat World o Guns or Cell Phones llowed o build may have to be the slow and laborious task of years.
To destroy can be he thoughtless act of a single day.
Sir Winston Churchill   a trip back home to Minnesota in the winter of 2004, I was aving lunch with my friends Ken and Jill Greer at Perkins pan ake house when Jill mentioned that the state had recently assed a new gun law.
The conceal and carry law, passed on May 28, 003, established that local sheriffs had to issue permits for anyone  ther than those with felony records or declared mentally illwho re uested to carry concealed firearms to work (unless the person s employer xplicitly restricted that right).
This law is supposed to deter criminals, ecause if they try to hold you up, they can't be sure that you too are not acking a weapon.
The law, though, contained a provision to allow busi ess owners to prevent nonemployees from bringing concealed weapons nto a place of business, like a restaurant or health club.
It said that any usiness could ban concealed handguns on its premises if it posted a sign t each entrance indicating that guns were not allowed there.
(This re ortedly led to some very creative signage, with one church suing the tate for the right to use a biblical quote as its gun-banning sign and a estaurant using a picture of a woman in a cooking apron toting a ma hine gun.)
The reason this all came up at our lunch was that Jill men ioned that at health clubs around the city, where she played tennis, she  H E W O R L D IS F L A T oticed two signs now popping up regularly, one right after the other.
At heir tennis club in Bloomington, for example, there is a sign right by the ront door that says, "No Guns Allowed."
And then nearby, outside the ocker rooms, is another sign: "No Cell Phones Allowed."
mmm.
No guns or cell phones allowed?
Guns I understand, I said, ut why cell phones?
illy me.
It was because some people were bringing cell phones with ameras into locker rooms, covertly taking pictures of naked men and omen and then e-mailing them around the world.
What will they think of ext?
Whatever the innovation, people will find a way to use it and abuse it.
hile interviewing Promod Haque at Norwest Venture Partners in alo Alto, I was helped by the firm's public relations director, Katie elding, who later sent me this e-mail: "I was chatting with my husband bout your meeting with Promod the other day .
He is a history teacher t a high school in San Mateo.
I asked him, 'Where were you when the orld went flat?'
He said it just happened the other day at school when he as in a faculty meeting.
A student was suspended for helping another tudent cheat on a testwe're not talking the traditional writing answers n the bottom of your shoe or passing a note, though .
."
Intrigued, I alled her husband, Brian, and he picked up the story: "At the end of the eriod, when all of the tests were being passed up to the front of the class oom, this student very quickly and slyly pulled out his cell phone and omehow snapped a picture of some test questions, and instantly e-mailed t to his friend who was taking the same test the next period.
His friend lso had a cell phone with a digital camera and e-mail capabilities, and as apparently able to view the questions before the next period.
The stu ent was caught by another teacher when he pulled out the cell phone etween periods.
It is against the rules to have a cell phone on campus ven though we know that all the kids doso the teacher confiscated it nd saw that the kid had a test on it.
So the dean of discipline, at our reg lar faculty meeting, opened by saying, 'We have something new to worry bout.'
Essentially he said, 'Beware, keep your eyes open, because the kids re so far ahead of us in terms of the technology.'
" ut things aren't all bad with this new technology, noted Brian: "I ent to a Jimmy Buffett concert earlier this year.
Cameras were not al- HE UNFLAT WORLD owed, but cell phones were.
So then the concert starts and everyone sud enly starts holding up their cell phones and taking pictures of Jimmy uffett.
I've got one right on my wall.
We were sitting in the second row nd the guy next to us held up his cell phone, and I said, 'Hey, would you ind e-mailing me some of those?
No one will believe we sat this close.'
e said 'Sure,' and we gave him a card with our e-mail [address].
We idn't really expect to see any, but the next day he e-mailed us a bunch."
y trip to Beijing described earlier fell right after the fifteenth anni ersary of the Tiananmen Square massacre, which happened on June 4, 989, that is, 6/4/89.
My colleagues at the Times bureau informed me hat on that day the Chinese government censors were blocking SMS essages on cell phones that contained any reference to Tiananmen quare or even the numbers 6 and 4.
So if you happened to be dialing he phone number 664-6464, or sending a message in which you told omeone you would meet at 6 p.m. on the 4th floor, the Chinese censors locked it using their jamming technology.
ark Steyn, writing in the National Review (October 25, 2004), re ated a story from the London Arabic newspaper Al-Quds al-Arabi about  panic that broke out in Khartoum, Sudan, after a crazy rumor swept the ity, claiming that if an infidel shook a man's hand, that man could lose is manhood.
"What struck me about the story," wrote Steyn, "was a de ail: The hysteria was spread by cell phones and text messaging.
Think bout that: You can own a cell phone yet still believe a foreigner's hand hake can melt away your penis.
What happens when that kind of tech ologically advanced primitivism advances beyond text messaging?"
his is not a chapter about cell phones, so why do I raise these stories?
ecause ever since I began writing about globalization, I've been chal enged by critics along one particular line: "Isn't there a certain techno ogical determinism to your argument?
To listen to you, Friedman, there re these ten flatteners, they are converging and flattening the earth, and here is nothing that people can do but bow to them and join the parade.
nd after a transition, everyone will get richer and smarter and it will all e fine.
But you're wrong, because the history of the world suggests that deological alternatives, and power alternatives, have always arisen to any ystem, and globalization will be no different."
H E W O R L D IS F L A T his is a legitimate question, so let me try to answer it directly: I am a echnological deterministl Guilty as charged.
believe that capabilities create intentions.
If we create an Internet here people can open an online store and have global suppliers, global ustomers, and global competitors, they will open that online store or ank or bookshop.
If we create work flow platforms that allow companies o disaggregate any job and source it to the knowledge center anywhere n the world that can perform that task most efficiently at the lowest cost, ompanies will do that sort of outsourcing.
If we create cell phones with ameras in them, people will use them for all sorts of tasks, from cheat ng on tests to calling Grandma in her nursing home on her ninetieth irthday from the top of a mountain in New Zealand.
The history of eco omic development teaches this over and over: If you can do it, you must o it, otherwise your competitors willand as this book has tried to emonstrate, there is a whole new universe of things that companies, ountries, and individuals can and must do to thrive in a flat world.
ut while I am a technological determinist, J am not a historical determinist.
There is absolutely no guarantee that everyone will use these ew technologies, or the triple convergence, for the benefit of them elves, their countries, or humanity.
These are just technologies.
Using hem does not make you modern, smart, moral, wise, fair, or decent.
It ust makes you able to communicate, compete, and collaborate farther nd faster.
In the absence of a world-destabilizing war, every one of these echnologies will become cheaper, lighter, smaller and more personal, obile, digital, and virtual.
Therefore, more and more people will find ore and more ways to use them.
We can only hope that more people in ore places will use them to create, collaborate, and grow their living tandards, not the opposite.
But it doesn't have to happen.
o put it bluntly, I don't know how the flattening of the world will ome out.
Indeed, let me go even further and make a deeper confession:  know that the world is not flat.
es, you read me right: I know that the world is not flat.
Don't worry.
know.
am certain, though, that the world has been shrinking and flatten ng for some time now, and that process has quickened dramatically in HE UNFLAT WORLD ecent years.
Half the world today is directly or indirectly participating in he flattening process or feeling its effects.
I have engaged in literary li ense in titling this book The World Is Flat to draw attention to this flat ening and its quickening pace because I think it is the single most mportant trend in the world today.
ut I am equally certain that it is not historically inevitable that the rest f the world will become flat or that the already flat parts of the world won't et unflattened by war, economic disruption, or politics.
There are hun reds of millions of people on this planet who have been left behind by the lattening process or feel overwhelmed by it, and some of them have nough access to the flattening tools to use them against the system, not on ts behalf.
How the flattening could go wrong is the subject of this chapter, nd I approach it by trying to answer the following questions: What are the iggest constituencies, forces, or problems impeding this flattening process, nd how might we collaborate better to overcome them?
oo ICK  nce heard Jerry Yang, the cofounder of Yahoo!, quote a senior hinese government official as saying, "Where people have hope, ou have a middle class."
I think this is a very useful insight.
The exis ence of large, stable middle classes around the world is crucial to geo olitical stability, but middle class is a state of mind, not a state of ncome.
That's why a majority of Americans always describe themselves s "middle class," even though by income statistics some of them wouldn't e considered as such.
"Middle class" is another way of describing eople who believe that they have a pathway out of poverty or lowerincome status toward a higher standard of living and a better future for heir kids.
You can be in the middle class in your head whether you make 2 a day or $200, if you believe in social mobilitythat your kids have a hance to live better than you doand that hard work and playing by the ules of your society will get you where you want to go.
n many ways, the line between those who are in the flat world and  H E W O R L D IS F L A T hose who are not is this line of hope.
The good news in India and China nd the countries of the former Soviet Empire today is that, with all their laws and internal contradictions, these countries are now home to hun reds of millions of people who are hopeful enough to be middle class.
he bad news in Africa today, as well as rural India, China, Latin America, nd plenty of dark corners of the developed world, is that there are hun reds of millions of people who have no hope and therefore no chance f making it into the middle class.
They have no hope for two reasons: ither they are too sick, or their local governments are too broken for hem to believe they have a pathway forward.
he first group, those who are too sick, are those whose lives are talked every day by HIV-AIDS, malaria, TB, and polio, and who do not ven enjoy steady electricity or potable water.
Many of these people live n shockingly close proximity with the flat world.
While in Bangalore I isited an experimental school, Shanti Bhavan, or "Haven of Peace."
It is ocated near the village of Baliganapalli, in Tamil Nadu Province, about n hour's drive from downtown Bangalore's glass-and-steel high-tech entersone of which is aptly called "The Golden Enclave."
On the rive there, the school's principal, Lalita Law, an intense, razor-sharp ndian Christian, explained to me, with barely controlled rage in her oice, that the school has 160 children, whose parents are all untouch bles from the nearby village.
These kids, their parents are ragpickers, coolies, and quarry labor rs," she said as we bounced along in a jeep on the potholed roads to the chool.
"They come from homes below the poverty line, and from the owest caste, the untouchables, who are supposed to be fulfilling their estiny and left where they are.
We get these children at ages four and ive.
They don't know what it is to have a drink of clean water.
They are sed to drinking filthy gutter water, if they are lucky enough to have a utter near where they live.
They have never seen a toilet, they don't ave baths.
They don't even have proper scraps of clothing.
We have o start by socializing them.
When we first get them they run out and uri ate and defecate wherever they want.
[At first] we don't make them leep on beds, because it is a culture shock."
HE UNFLAT WORLD  was typing frantically in the back of the jeep on my laptop to keep p with her scalding monologue about village life.
This 'India Shining thing [the slogan of the ruling Bharatiya Janata arty, BJP, in the 2004 election] irritates people like us," she added.
"You ave to come to the rural villages and see whether India is shining, and ou look into a child's face and see whether India is shining.
India is shin ng okay for the glossy magazines, but if you just go outside Bangalore ou will see that everything about India shining is refuted .
[In the vil ages] alcoholism is rife and female infanticide and crime are rising.
You ave to bribe to get electricity, water; you have to bribe the tax assessor to ssess your home correctly.
Yes, the middle and upper classes are taking ff, but the seven hundred million who are left behind, all they see is loom and darkness and despair.
They are born to fulfill their destiny and ave to live this way and die this way.
The only thing that shines for them s the sun, and it is hot and unbearable and too many of them die of heat troke."
The only "mouse" these kids have ever encountered, she added, s not one that rests next to a computer but the real thing.
here are thousands of such villages in rural India, China, Africa, and atin America.
And that is why it is no wonder that children in the devel ping worldthe unflat worldare ten times more likely to die of vaccinepreventable diseases than are children in the developed flat world.
In the orst-affected regions of rural southern Africa, a full one-third of pregnant omen are reportedly HIV-positive.
The AIDS epidemic alone is enough o put a whole society into a tailspin: Many teachers in these African ountries are now afflicted with AIDS, so they cannot teach, and young hildren, especially girls, have to drop out either because they must tend o sick and dying parents or because they have been orphaned by AIDS nd cannot afford the school fees.
And without education, young people annot learn how to protect themselves from HIY-AIDS or other diseases, et alone acquire the life-advancing skills that enable women to gain reater control over their own bodies and sexual partners.
The prospect of  full-blown AIDS epidemic in India and China, of the sort that has al eady debilitated southern Africa, remains very real, largely because only ne-fifth of the people at risk for HIV worldwide have access to prevention  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ervices.
Tens of millions of women who want and would benefit from amily-planning resources don't have them for lack of local funding.
You annot drive economic growth in a place where 50 percent of the people re infected with malaria or half of the kids are malnourished or a third of he mothers are dying of AIDS.
here is no question that China and India are better off for having at east part of their population in the flat world.
When societies begin to rosper, you get a virtuous cycle going: They begin to produce enough ood for people to leave the land, the excess labor gets trained and edu ated, it begins working in services and industry; that leads to innovation nd better education and universities, freer markets, economic growth nd development, better infrastructure, fewer diseases, and slower popu ation growth.
It is that dynamic that is going on in parts of urban India nd urban China today, enabling people to compete on a level playing ield and attracting investment dollars by the billions.
ut there are many, many others living outside this cycle.
They live in illages or rural areas that only criminals would want to invest in, regions here violence, civil war, and disease compete with one another to see hich can ravage the civilian population most.
The world will be entirely lat only when all these people are brought into it.
One of the few people ith enough dollars to make a difference who has stepped up to this hallenge is Microsoft chairman Bill Gates, whose $27 billion Bill and elinda Gates Foundation has focused on this huge, disease-ravaged, pportunity-deprived population.
I have been a critic of some of Micro oft's business practices over the years, and I do not regret one word I ave written about some of its anticompetitive tactics.
But I have been mpressed by Gates's personal commitment of money and energy to ad ress the unflat world.
Both times I spoke to Gates, this is the subject he anted to talk about most and addressed with the most passion.
No one funds things for that other three billion," said Gates.
"Someone stimated that the cost of saving a life in the U.S. is $5 or $6 millionthat s how much our society is willing to spend.
You can save a life outside of he U.S. for less than $100.
But how many people want to make that in estment?
If it was just a matter of time," Gates continued, "you know, give it HE UNFLAT WORLD wenty or thirty years and the others will be there, then it would be great o declare that the whole world is flat.
But the fact is, there is a trap that hese three billion are caught in, and they may never get into the virtu us cycle of more education, more health, more capitalism, more rule of aw, more wealth .
I am worried that it could just be half the world that s flat and it stays that way."
ake malaria, a disease caused by a parasite carried by mosquitoes.
It s the greatest killer of mothers on the planet right now.
While virtually o one dies of malaria today in the flat world, more than one million eople die from this disease each year in the unflat world, about seven undred thousand of them children, most of them in Africa.
Deaths rom malaria have actually doubled in the last twenty years because the alaria parasite carried by mosquitoes has become resistant to many anti alarial drugs, and commercial drug companies have not invested uch in new antimalarial vaccines because they believe there is no prof table market for them.
If this crisis were happening in a flat country, oted Gates, the system would work: Government would do what it eeded to do to contain the disease, pharmaceutical companies would o what they needed to do to get the drugs to market, schools would ed cate young people about preventive measures, and the problem would e licked.
"But this nice response works only when the people who have he problem also have some money," said Gates.
When the Gates Foun ation issued a $50 million grant to combat malaria, he added, "people aid we just doubled the amount of money [worldwide] going to fight alaria .
When the people who have the need don't have the money, t takes outside groups and charities to get them to the point where the ystem can kick in for them."
p to now, though, argued Gates, "we have not given these people a hance [to be in the flat world].
The kid who is connected to the Internet oday, if he has the curiosity [he] is as [empowered] as me.
But if he does ot get the right nutrition, he will never play that game.
Yes, the world is maller, but do we really see the conditions that people live in?
Isn't the orld still really big enough that we don't see the real conditions that eople live in, the kid whose life can be saved for $80?"
et's stop here for a moment and imagine how beneficial it would be  H E W O R L D IS F L A T or the world, and for America, if rural China, India, and Africa were to row into little Americas or European Unions in economic and oppor unity terms.
But the chances of their getting into such a virtuous cycle is iny without a real humanitarian push by flat-world businesses, philan hropies, and governments to devote more resources to their problems.
he only way out is through new ways of collaboration between the flat nd unflat parts of the world.
n 2003, the Gates Foundation launched a project called Grand hallenges in Global Health.
What I like about it is the way the Gates oundation approached solving this problem.
They didn't say, "We, the ich Western foundation, will now deliver you the solution," and then is ue instructions and write some checks.
They said, "Let's collaborate orizontally on defining both the problem and the solutionslet's cre te value that wayand then [the foundation] will invest our money in he solutions we both define."
So the Gates Foundation placed ads on he Web and in more conventional channels across both the developed nd the developing worlds, asking scientists to respond to one big ques ion: What are the biggest problems that, if science attended to them and olved them, could most dramatically change the fate of the several bil ion people trapped in the vicious cycle of infant mortality, low life ex ectancy, and disease?
The foundation got about eight thousand pages of deas from hundreds of scientists from around the world, including obel laureates.
A special board of scientists and doctors from around he world then culled through them and distilled them down to a list of ourteen Grand Challengeschallenges where a technological innova ion could remove a critical barrier to the solving of an important health roblem in the developing world.
In the fall of 2003, it announced these ourteen Grand Challenges worldwide.
They include the following: ow to create effective single-dose vaccines that can be used soon after irth, how to prepare vaccines that do not require refrigeration, how to evelop needle-free delivery systems for vaccines, how to better under tand which immunological responses provide protective immunity, how o better control insects that transmit agents of disease, how to develop a enetic or chemical strategy to incapacitate a disease-transmitting insect opulation, how to create a full range of optimal bioavailable nutrients in HE UNFLAT WORLD  single staple plant species, and how to create immunological methods hat can cure chronic infections.
Within a year, the foundation received ifteen hundred proposals for ways to meet these challenges from scien ists in seventy-five countries.
The foundation then awarded forty-three rants worth $436 million in cash.
We're trying to accomplish two things with this program," explained ick Klausner, a former head of the National Cancer Institute who directed he global health programs for the Gates Foundation before stepping down n the fall of 2005.
"The first is [to make] a moral appeal to the scientific magination, [pointing out] that there are great problems to be solved that e, the scientific community, have ignored, even though we pride our elves in how international we are.
We have not taken our responsibilities as lobal problem solvers as seriously as our self-identity as an international ommunity.
We wanted the Grand Challenges to say these are the most ex iting, sexy, scientific things that anyone in the world could work on right ow .
The idea was to fire the imagination.
The second thing is to actu lly direct some of the foundation's resources to see if we could do it."
hat was interesting, said Klausner, was how quickly the different rant winners assembled themselves into collaborative communities ecause it really does take a village to solve such complex problems, and he scientists quickly realized that they were not competing with one an ther.
"People said if you are really going to solve a big problem today, ou need to do it with much more horizontal collaboration," he noted.
And this [flat] world enables it.
You can do a project on your own, but ou can't solve a big problem on your own.
But we did not expect this.
ecause while we talk about collaboration, competition is so ingrained n the creative steroid of science, it just was not clear that people would ut down the competition in order to be part of a larger community solv ng a problem.
It is not the natural tendency.
We were surprised by this."
iven the phenomenal advances in technology in the last twenty ears, it is easy to assume that we already have all the tools to address ome of these challenges and that the only thing lacking is money.
I wish hat were the case, but it is not.
In the instance of malaria, for example, it sn't just the drugs that are missing.
As anyone who has visited Africa or ural India knows, the health-care systems in these areas are often broken  H E W O R L D IS F L A T r functioning at a very low level.
So the Gates Foundation is trying to timulate the development of drugs and delivery systems that presume a roken health-care system and therefore can be safely self-administered y ordinary people in the field.
That may be the grandest challenge of all: o use the tools of the flat world to design tools that work in an unflat orld.
"The most important health-care system in the world is a mother ," aid Klausner.
"How do you get things in her hands that she understands nd can afford and can use?
When we think about health problems in he developing world, the men are almost invisible, except as a source of art of the problem.
It is all about the women."
he tragedy of all these people is really a dual tragedy, added Klaus er.
There is the individual tragedy of facing a death sentence from dis ase or a life sentence of broken families and limited expectations.
And here is the tragedy for the world because of the incredible lost contribu ion that all these people still outside the flat world could be making.
In a lat world, where we are connecting all the knowledge pools together, magine what knowledge those people could bring to science or educa ion.
In a flat world, where innovation can come from anywhere, we are etting a huge pool of potential contributors and collaborators slip under he waves.
There is no question that poverty causes ill health, but ill ealth also traps people in poverty, which in turn weakens them and eeps them from grasping the first rung of the ladder to middle-class ope.
Until and unless we can meet some of these grand challenges, uch of that 50 percent of the world that is still not flat will stay that ayno matter how flat the other 50 percent gets.
here is another aspect of "too sick" that we need to consider, hough: What happens if the too sick meet the really flat?
Let me put it nother way.
The world has long witnessed pandemics that have wiped ut millions of people in a very short period of time.
And the world has ecently witnessed the rise of Wal-Mart and its remarkable high-speed upply chain, which is able to transmit products from one corner of the orld to another in a very short period of time.
What the world has never itnessed is an old-style pandemic in a Wal-Mart world.
flu pandemic in a Wal-Mart world would be a hugely unflattening ightmare from two directions at once: From one side, the flat world HE UNFLAT WORLD ould enable any pandemic to spread much faster and much wider, robably killing many more people.
And, from the other side, it would ake the economic devastation from such a pandemic so much greater nd more sudden, because our natural response to pandemics is to put p walls and to sever connectivity and face-to-face contactsince the ovement and interaction of both people and goods is precisely what preads something like the influenza virus.
Even when the world was ound, this was devastating, as we saw with the 1918 flu pandemic.
But hen the world is flatteningwhen some 80 percent of the raw materi ls that go into pharmaceutical drugs sold in America come from over eas suppliers, and when the rubber that keeps surgical masks tight n your face comes through a just-in-time supply chain that starts in ndonesia or Africa, stretches through Europe, and then skips over to mericaour ability to cope with any pandemic would be sharply re uced.
Everyone would be putting up roadblocks and "stay out" signs, isrupting every supply chain in the world.
In short, a pandemic in a flat ening world would make acquiring the lifesaving vaccines and other edical supplies just in time more important than ever.
But our ability o acquire them just in time would be curtailed more than ever.
And we ouldn't have the inventories to put to use because in a flat world in entories have come to be viewed as waste.
You want just-in-time deliv ry of everything.
ichael T. Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease esearch and Policy and professor at the University of Minnesota's chool of Public Health, notes that the spread of the SARS (Severe Acute espiratory Syndrome) virus in 2003 demonstrated just how quickly such n infectious disease can move in a flattening world, given the speed and ensity of international air travel.
Once SARS emerged in rural China, e noted, it spread to five countries within twenty-four hours, and to hirty countries on six continents within several months causing bil ions of dollars in economic loss, because, for instance, longshoremen n the West Coast of the United States did not want to off-load cargo hips that had come from infected regions.
ut the transmission rate of SARS is like a turtle compared to an in luenza pandemic.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T We have set ourselves up for a much more rapid transmission of any irus," said Osterholm, "but the implications of a killer influenza pan emic will be so much more devastating in today's world."
t could undermine so many of the features, business practices, and onveniences we have come to take for granted in the modern ageas ell as stop the flattening process dead in its tracks.
OO lSEMPOWERED  ere's not just the flat world and the unflat world.
Many people live n the twilight zone between the two.
Among these are the people I all the too disempowered.
They are a large group of people who have ot been fully encompassed by the flattening of the world.
Unlike the too ick, who have yet even to get a chance to step onto the flat world, the oo disempowered are people who you might say are half flat.
They are ealthy people who live in countries with significant areas that have een flattened but who don't have the tools or the skills or the infra tructure to participate in any meaningful or sustained way.
They have ust enough information to know that the world is flattening around hem and that they aren't really getting any of the benefits.
Being flat is ood but full of pressure, being unflat is awful and full of pain, but being alf flat has its own special anxiety.
As exciting and as visible as the flat ndian high-tech sector is, have no illusions: It accounts for 0.2 percent f employment in India.
Add those Indians involved in manufacturing or export, and you get a total of 2 percent of employment in India.
he half flat are all those other hundreds of millions of people, partic larly in rural India, rural China, and rural Eastern Europe, who are close nough to see, touch, and occasionally benefit from the flat world but ho are not really living inside it themselves.
We saw how big and how an ry this group can be in the spring of 2004 Indian national elections, in hich the ruling BJP was surprisingly tossed out of officedespite having verseen a surge in India's growth ratelargely because of the discontent f rural Indian voters with the slow pace of globalization outside the gi- HE UNFLAT WORLD nt cities.
These voters were not saying, "Stop the globalization train, we ant to get off."
They were saying, "Stop the globalization train, we want o get on, but someone needs to help us by building a better stepstool."
hese rural voterspeasants and farmers, who form the bulk of India s opulationjust had to spend a day in any nearby big city to see the ben fits of the flat world: the cars, the houses, the educational opportunities.
Every time a villager watches the community T V and sees an ad for soap r shampoo, what they notice are not the soap and shampoo but the ifestyle of the people using themthe kind of motorbikes they ride, their ress, and their homes," explained Indian-born Nayan Chanda, editor of aleGlobal Online.
"They see a world they want access to.
This election as about envy and anger.
It was a classic case of revolutions happening hen things are getting better but not fast enough for many people."
t the same time, these rural Indians understood, at gut level, exactly hy it was not happening for them: because local governments have be ome so eaten away by corruption and mismanagement that they cannot eliver to the poor the schools and infrastructure they need to get a fair hare of the pie.
As some of these millions of Indians on the outside of the ated communities looking in lose hope, "they become more religious, ore tied to their caste/subcaste, more radical in their thinking, more illing to snatch than create, [and] view dirty politics as being the only ay to get mobility, since economic mobility is stalled," said Vivek Paul f Wipro.
India can have the smartest high-tech vanguard in the world, ut if it does not find a way to bring along more of those who are unable, isabled, undereducated, and underserved, it will be like a rocket that akes off but quickly falls back to earth for lack of sustained thrust.
he Congress Party got the message, which was why as soon as it took ffice it chose as its prime minister not some antiglobalizer but Manmohan ingh, the former Indian finance minister, who in 1991firstopened the ndian economy to globalization, placing an emphasis on exports and rade and reform wholesale.
And Singh, in turn, pledged himself to vasdy ncrease government investments in rural infrastructure and to bring ore reform retail to rural government.
ow can outsiders collaborate in this process?
I think, first and fore ost, they can redefine the meaning of global populism.
If populists  H E W O R L D IS F L A T eally want to help the rural poor, the way to do it is not by burning down cDonald's and shutting down the IMF and trying to put up protec ionist barriers that will unflatten the world.
That will help the rural poor ot one iota.
It has to be by refocusing the energies of the global populist ovement on how to improve local government, infrastructure, and ed cation in places like rural India and China, so the populations there an acquire the tools to collaborate and participate in the flat world.
The lobal populist movement, better known as the antiglobalization move ent, has a great deal of energy, but up to now it has been too divided nd confused to effectively help the poor in any meaningful or sustained anner.
It needs a policy lobotomy.
The world's poor do not resent the ich anywhere nearly as much as the left-wing parties in the developed orld imagine.
What they resent is not having any pathway to get rich nd to join the flat world and cross that line into the middle class that erry Yang spoke about.
et's pause for a minute here and trace how the antiglobalization ovement lost touch with the true aspirations of the world's poor.
The ntiglobalization movement emerged at the World Trade Organization onference in Seattle in 1999 and then spread around the world in sub equent years, usually gathering to attack meetings of the World Bank, the MF, and the G-8 industrialized nations.
From its origins, the movement hat emerged in Seattle was a primarily Western-driven phenomenon, hich was why you saw so few people of color in the crowds.
It was driven y five disparate forces.
One was upper-middle-class American liberal uilt at the incredible wealth and power that America had amassed in the ake of the fall of the Berlin Wall and the dot-com boom.
At the peak of he stock market boom, lots of pampered American college kids, wearing heir branded clothing, began to get interested in sweatshops as a way of xpiating their guilt.
The second force driving it was a rear-guard push by he Old Leftsocialists, anarchists, and Trotskyitesin alliance with pro ectionist trade unions.
Their strategy was to piggyback on rising concerns bout globalization to bring back some form of socialism, even though hese ideas had been rejected as bankrupt by the very people in the former oviet Empire and China who had lived under them longest.
(Now you now why there was no antiglobalization movement to speak of in Russia, HE UNFLAT WORLD hina, or Eastern Europe.)
These Old Left forces wanted to spark a de ate about whether we globalize.
They claimed to speak in the name of he Third World poor, but the bankrupt economic policies they advo ated made them, in my view, the Coalition to Keep Poor People Poor.
he third force was a more amorphous group.
It was made up of many eople who gave passive support to the antiglobalization movement from any countries, because they saw in it some kind of protest against the peed at which the old world was disappearing and becoming flat.
he fourth force driving the movement, which was particularly strong n Europe and in the Islamic world, was anti-Americanism.
The disparity etween American economic and political power and everybody else's had rown so wide after the fall of the Soviet Empire that America began to r was perceived totouch people's lives around the planet, directiy or in irectly, more than their own governments did.
As people around the orld began to intuit this, a movement emerged, which Seattle both re lected and helped to catalyze, whereby people said, in effect, "If America s now touching my life directly or indirectly more than my own govern ent, then I want to have a vote in America's power."
At the time of eatfle, the "touching" that people were most concerned with was from merican economic and cultural power, and therefore the demand for a ote tended to focus on economic rule-making institutions like the World rade Organization.
America in the 1990s, under President Clinton, was erceived as a big dumb dragon, pushing people around in the economic nd cultural spheres, knowingly and unknowingly.
We were Puff the agic Dragon, and people wanted a vote in what we were puffing.
hen came 9/11.
And America transformed itself from Puff the agic Dragon, touching people around the world economically and ulturally, into Godzilla with an arrow in his shoulder, spitting fire and ossing around his tail wildly, touching people's lives in military and se urity terms, not just economic and cultural ones.
As that happened, eople in the world began to say, "Now we really want a vote in how merica wields its power" and in many ways the whole Iraq war debate as a surrogate debate about that.
inally, the fifth force in this movement was a coalition of very seri us, well-meaning, and constructive groups from environmentalists to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T rade activists to NGOs concerned with governancewho became part f the populist antiglobalization movement in the 1990s in the hopes hat they could catalyze a global discussion about how we globalize.
I had  lot of respect and sympathy for this latter group.
But in the end they got rowned out by the whether-we-globalize crowd, which began to turn he movement more violent at the July 2001 Genoa G-8 summit, when n antiglobalization protester was killed while attacking an Italian police eep with a fire extinguisher.
he combination of the triple convergence, the violence at Genoa, /11, and tighter security measures fractured the antiglobalization move ent.
The more serious how-we-globalize groups did not want to be in he same trench with anarchists out to provoke a public clash with police, nd after 9/11, many American labor groups did not want to be associated ith a movement that appeared to be taken over by anti-American ele ents.
This became even more pronounced when in late September 001, just weeks after 9/11, antiglobalization leaders attempted a rerun of enoa in the streets of Washington, to protest the IMF and World Bank eetings there.
After 9/11, though, the IMF and World Bank canceled heir meetings, and many American protesters shied away.
Those who did urn up in the streets of Washington turned the event into a march against he imminent American invasion of Afghanistan to remove Osama bin aden and al-Qaeda.
At the same time, with the triple convergence mak ng the Chinese, Indians, and Eastern Europeans some of the biggest eneficiaries of globalization, it was no longer possible to claim that this henomenon was devastating the world's poor.
Just the opposite: Millions f Chinese and Indians were entering the world's middle class thanks to he flattening of the world and globalization.
o as the how-we-globalize forces drifted away, and as the number of hird World people benefiting from globalization began to grow, and as merica under the Bush administration began to exercise more unilat ral military power, the anti-American element in the antiglobalization ovement began to assume a much louder voice and role.
As a result, he movement itself became both more anti-American and more unable nd unwilling to play any constructive role in shaping the global debate n how we globalize, precisely when such a role has become even more HE UNFLAT WORLD mportant as the world has gotten flatter.
As Hebrew University political heorist Yaron Ezrahi so aptly noted, "The important task of enlisting the eople's power to influence globalism making it more compassionate, air, and compatible with human dignityis way too important to be asted on crass anti-Americanism or left in the hands of only antiAmericans."
here is a huge political vacuum now waiting to be filled.
There is a eal role today for a movement that could advance the agenda of how we lobalize not whether we globalize.
The best place such a movement ould start is rural India.
Both the Congress [Party] and its left allies would be risking India's uture if they draw the wrong conclusion from this [2004] election," ratap Bhanu Mehta, who heads the Center for Policy Research in elhi, wrote in The Hindu newspaper.
"This is not a revolt against the arket, it is a protest against the state; this is not resentment against the ains of liberalization, but a call for the state to put its house in order hrough even more reform .
The revolt against holders of power is not  revolt of the poor against the rich: ordinary people are far less prone to esent other people's success than intellectuals suppose.
It is rather an ex ression of the fact that the reform of the state has not gone far enough."
his is why the most important forces fighting poverty in India today, n my view, are those NGOs fighting for better local governance, using he Internet and other modern tools of the flat world to put a spotiight on orruption, mismanagement, and tax avoidance.
The most important, ffective, and meaningful populists in the world today are not those anding out money.
They are those with an agenda to drive reform retail t the local level in their countriesto make it easier for the little men nd women to register their land, even if they are squatters; to start a busi ess, no matter how small; and to get minimal justice from the legal sys em.
Modern populism, to be effective and meaningful, should be about eform retail making globalization workable, sustainable, and fair for ore people by improving their local governance, so that the money ear arked for the poor actually gets to them and so that their natural entrepreneurship can get unlocked.
It is through local government that eople plug into the system and get to enjoy the benefits of the flattening  H E W O R L D IS F L A T orld rather than just observe them.
The average Indian villagers cannot e like the Indian high-tech companies and just circumvent the govern ent by supplying their own electricity, their own water resources, their wn security, their own bus system, and their own satellite dishes.
They eed the state for that.
The market cannot be counted on to make up for he failure of the state to deliver decent governance.
The state has to get etter.
Precisely because the Indian state opted for a globalization strat gy in 1991 and abandoned fifty years of socialismwhich had brought ts foreign reserves to near zero New Delhi had reserves in 2004 of 100 billion, giving it the resources to help more of its people into the lat arena.
amesh Ramanathan, an Indian-born former Citibank executive who eturned to India to lead an NGO called Janaagraha, dedicated to im roving local governance, is precisely the kind of new populist I have in ind.
"In India," he said, "clients of public education are sending a signal bout the quality of service delivery: Whoever can afford to opt out does o.
The same goes for health care.
Given the escalating costs of health are, if we had a solid public health-care system, most citizens would opt o use it, not just the poor.
Ditto for roads, highways, water supply, sanita ion, registration of births and deaths, crematoria, driver's licenses, and so n. Wherever the government provides these services, it [should be] for he benefit of all citizens.
[But] in fact, in some of these, like water supply nd sanitation, the poor are actually not even getting the same basic ser ices as the middle class and the rich.
The challenge here is therefore niversal access."
Getting NGOs that can collaborate on the local level to nsure that the poor get the infrastructure and budgets to which they are ntitled could have a major impact on poverty alleviation.
o although this may sound odd coming from me, it is totally consis ent with this whole book: What the world doesn't need now is for the ntiglobalization movement to go away.
We just need it to grow up.
This ovement had a lot of energy and a lot of mobilizing capacity.
What it acked was a coherent agenda for assisting the poor by collaborating with hem in a way that could actually help them.
The activist groups that are elping alleviate poverty the most are those working at the local village evel in places like rural India, Africa, and China to spotlight and fight HE UNFLAT WORLD orruption and to promote accountability, transparency, education, and roperty rights.
You don't help the world's poor by dressing up in a turtle utfit and throwing a stone through McDonald's window.
You help them y getting them the tools and institutions to help themselves.
It may not e as sexy as protesting against world leaders in the streets of Washington nd Genoa, and getting lots of attention on CNN, but it is a lot more im ortant.
Just ask any Indian villager.
ollaboration in poverty alleviation is not just for NGOs.
It is also for ultinational corporations.
The rural poor in India, Africa, and China epresent a huge market, and it is possible to make money there and serve hemif companies are ready to collaborate horizontally with the poor.
ne of the most interesting examples I have come across of this form of ollaboration is a program run by Hewlett-Packard.
HP is not an NGO.
P began with a simple question: What do poor people need most that e could sell to them?
You cannot design this stuff in Palo Alto; you have o cocreate with the user-customer beneficiary.
In order to answer that uestion, HP created a public-private partnership with the national gov rnment in India and the local government in Andhra Pradesh.
Then a roup of HP technologists convened a series of dialogues in the farming illage of Kuppam.
It asked residents two things: What are your hopes for he next three to five years?
and What changes would really make your ives better?
To help the villagers (many of them illiterate) express them elves, HP used a concept called graphic facilitation, whereby when eople voiced their dreams and aspirations, a visual artist whom HP rought over from the United States drew images of those aspirations on raft paper put up on the walls around the room.
When people, particularly people who are illiterate, say something nd it gets immediately represented on the wall, they feel really vali ated, and therefore they get more animated and more engaged," said aureen Conway, HP's vice president for emerging market solutions, ho headed the project.
"It raises self-esteem."
Once these poor farmers iving in a remote village got loose, they really started aspiring.
"One of hem said, 'What we really need here is an airport,' " said Conway.
fter the visioning sessions were complete, HP employees spent ore time in the village just observing how people lived.
One techno-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ogical thing missing in their lives was photography.
Conway explained: We noticed that there was a big demand for having pictures taken for dentification purposes, for licenses, for applications and government ermits, and we said to ourselves, 'Maybe there is an entrepreneurial op ortunity here if we can turn people into village photographers.'
There as one photo studio in downtown Kuppam.
Everyone around [is a] armer.
We noticed that people would come back in from villages on a us, spend two hours, get their pictures taken, come back a week later for he pictures, and find out that they were not done or done wrong.
Time s as important for them as for us.
So we said, 'Wait a minute, we make igital cameras and portable printers.
So what is the problem?'
Why oesn't HP sell them a bunch of digital cameras and printers?
The vil agers came back with a very short answer: 'Electricity.'
They had no as ured supply of electricity and little money to pay for it.
So we said, 'We are technologists.
Let's get a solar panel and put it n a backpack on wheels and see if there is a business for people here, nd for HP, if we make a mobile photo studio.'
That is the approach we ook.
The solar panel can charge both the camera and the printer.
Then e went to a self-help women's group.
We picked five women and said, We will train you how to use this equipment.'
We gave them two weeks f training.
And we said, 'We will provide you with the camera and sup lies, and we will share revenue with you on every picture.'
" This was not harity.
Even after buying all their supplies from HP and sharing some of he revenue with HP, the women in the photography group doubled heir family incomes.
"And to be honest, what we found out was that less han 50 percent of the pictures they took were for identification pictures nd the rest were people just wanting pictures of their kids, weddings, nd themselves," said Conway.
The poor like family photo albums as uch as the rich and are ready to pay for them.
The local government lso made this women's group its official photographers for public works rojects, which added to their income.
nd of story?
Not quite.
As I said, HP is not an NGO.
"After four onths we said, 'Okay, the experiment is over, we're taking the camera ack,'" said Conway.
"And they said, 'You're crazy.'"
So HP told the omen that if they wanted to keep the camera, printer, and solar panel, HE UNFLAT WORLD hey had to come up with a plan to pay for them.
They eventually pro osed renting them for $9 a month, and HP agreed.
And now they are ranching out into other villages.
HP, meanwhile, has started working ith an NGO to train multiple women's groups with the same mobile hotography studio, and there is a potential here for HP to sell the studios o NGOs all over India, with all of them using HP ink and other supplies.
nd from India, who knows where?
They are giving us feedback on the cameras and ease of use," said onway.
"What it has done to change the confidence of the women is bsolutely amazing."
oo RUSTRATED  e of the unintended consequences of the flat world is that it puts ifferent societies and cultures in much greater direct contact with ne another.
It connects people to people much faster than people and ultures can often prepare themselves.
Some cultures thrive on the sud en opportunities for collaboration that this global intimacy makes pos ible.
Others are threatened, frustrated, and even humiliated by this close ontact, which, among other things, makes it very easy for people to see here they stand in the world vis--vis everyone else.
All of this helps to xplain the emergence of one of the most dangerous unflattening forces odaythe suicide bombers of al-Qaeda and the other Islamist terror or anizations, who are coming out of the Muslim world and Muslim com unities in Europe.
he Arab-Muslim world is a vast, diverse civilization, encompassing ver one billion people and stretching from Morocco to Indonesia and rom Nigeria all the way to the suburbs of London.
It is very dangerous to eneralize about such a complex religious community, made up of so any different ethnicities and nationalities.
But one need only look at the eadlines in any day's newspaper to appreciate that a lot of anger and frus ration seems to be boiling over from the Muslim world in general and rom the Arab-Muslim world in particular, where many young people  H E W O R L D IS F L A T eem to be agitated by a combination of issues.
One of the most obvious s the festering Arab-Israeli conflict, and the Israeli occupation of Pale tinian land and East Jerusalema grievance that has a powerful emo ional hold on the Arab-Muslim imagination and has long soured elations with America and the West.
ut this is not the only reason for the brewing anger in these com unities.
This anger also has to do with the frustration of Arabs and uslims at having to live, in many, many cases, under authoritarian overnments, which not only deprive their people of a voice in their own uture, but have deprived tens of millions of young people in particular f opportunities to achieve their full potential through good jobs and odern schools.
The fact that the flat world enables people so easily to ompare their circumstances with others only sharpens their frustrations.
ome of these Arab-Muslim young men and women have chosen to migrate in order to find opportunities in the West; others have chosen o suffer in silence at home, hoping for some kind of change.
The most owerful journalistic experiences I have had since 9/11 have been my ncounters in the Arab world with some of these young people.
Because y column with my picture runs in Arabic in the leading pan-Arab ewspaper, the London-based Al-Sharq Al-Awsat, and because I often ppear on Arab satellite-television news programs, many people in that art of the world know what I look like.
I have been amazed by the num er of young Arabs and Muslims men and womenwho have come p to me on the streets of Cairo or in the Arabian Gulf since 9/11 and aid to me what one young man in Al-Azhar mosque did one Friday, af er noon prayer: "You're Friedman, aren't you?"
nodded yes.
Keep writing what you're writing," he said.
What he meant was writ ng about the importance of bringing more freedom of thought, expres ion, and opportunity to the Arab-Muslim world so its young people can ealize their potential.
nfortunately, though, these progressive young people are not the nes defining the relationship between the Arab-Muslim community nd the world at large today.
Increasingly, that relationship is being dom nated by, and defined by, religious militants and extremists, who give HE UNFLAT WORLD ent to the frustrations in that part of the world by simply lashing out.
he question that I want to explore in this section is: What produced this iolent Islamist fringe, and why has it found so much passive support in he Arab-Muslim world todayeven though, I am convinced, the vast ajority there do not share the violent agenda of these groups or their pocalyptic visions?
he question is relevant to a book about the flat world for a very imple reason: Should there be another attack on the United States of he magnitude of 9/11, or worse, walls would go up everywhere and the lattening of the world would be set back for a long, long time.
hat, of course, is precisely what the Islamists want.
hen Muslim radicals and fundamentalists look at the West, they ee only the openness that makes us, in their eyes, decadent and promis uous.
They see only the openness that has produced Britney Spears and aris Hilton.
They do not see, and do not want to see, the openness the reedom of thought and inquirythat has made us powerful, the open ess that has produced Bill Gates and Sally Ride.
They deliberately de ine it all as decadence.
Because if openness, women's empowerment, nd freedom of thought and inquiry are the real sources of the West's conomic strength, then the Arab-Muslim world would have to change.
nd the fundamentalists and extremists do not want to change.
o beat back the threat of openness, the Muslim extremists have, uite deliberately, chosen to attack the very thing that keeps open soci ties open, innovating, and flattening, and that is trust.
When terrorists ake instruments from our daily livesthe car, the airplane, the tennis hoe, the cell phoneand turn them into weapons of indiscriminate vi lence, they reduce trust.
We trust when we park our car downtown in he morning that the car next to it is not going to blow up; we trust when e go to Disney World that the man in the Mickey Mouse outfit is not earing a bomb-laden vest underneath; we trust when we get on the huttle flight from Boston to New York that the foreign student seated ext to us isn't going to blow up his tennis shoes.
Without trust, there is o open society, because there are not enough police to patrol every pening in an open society.
Without trust, there can also be no flat orld, because it is trust that allows us to take down walls, remove barri-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T rs, and eliminate friction at borders.
Trust is essential for a flat world, here you have supply chains involving ten, a hundred, or a thousand eople, most of whom have never met face-to-face.
The more open soci ties are exposed to indiscriminate terrorism, the more trust is removed, nd the more open societies will erect walls and dig moats instead.
he founders of al-Qaeda are not religious fundamentalists per se.
hat is, they are not focused simply on the relationship between them elves and God, and on the values and cultural norms of the religious ommunity.
They are a political phenomenon more than a religious ne.
I like to call them Islamo-Leninists.
I use the term "Leninists" to onvey the utopian-totalitarian vision of al-Qaeda as well as its self-image.
s al-Qaeda's chief ideologist, Ayman al-Zawahiri, has put it, al-Qaeda is he ideological vanguard, whose attacks on the United States and other estern targets are designed to mobilize and energize the Muslim asses to rise up against their own corrupt rulers, who are propped up by merica.
Like all good Leninists, the Islamo-Leninists are certain that he Muslim masses are deeply dissatisfied with their lot and that one or wo spectacular acts of jihad against the "pillars of tyranny" in the West ill spark them to overthrow the secularizing, immoral, and unjust ArabMuslim regimes that have defiled Islam.
In their place, the IslamoLeninists, however, do not want to establish a workers' paradise but rather  religious paradise.
They vow to establish an Islamic state across the same erritory that Islam ruled over at its height, led by a caliph, a supreme eligious-political leader, who would unite all the Muslim peoples into a ingle community.
slamo-Leninism in many ways emerged from the same historical ontext as the radical European ideologies of the nineteenth and twenti th centuries.
Fascism and Marxism-Leninism grew out of the rapid in ustrialization and modernization of Germany and Central Europe, here communities living in tightly bonded villages and extended fami ies suddenly got shattered and the sons and fathers went off to the urban reas to work for big industrial companies.
In this age of transitions, oung men in particular lost a sense of identity, rootedness, and personal ignity that had been provided by traditional social structures.
In that acuum, along came Hitler, Lenin, and Mussolini, who told these young HE UNFLAT WORLD en that they had an answer for their feelings of dislocation and humil ation: You may not be in the village or small town anymore, but you are till proud, dignified members of a larger communitythe working lass, or the Aryan nation.
in Laden offered the same sort of ideological response for young rabs and Muslims.
The first person to recognize the Islamo-Leninist haracter of these 9/11 hijackersthat they were not fundamentalists but dherents of an extreme, violent political cultwas Adrian Karatnycky, he president of Freedom House.
In a November 5, 2001, article in the ational Review, titled "Under Our Very Noses," Karatnycky makes the ollowing argument: "The key hijackers .
were well-educated children f privilege.
None of them suffered first-hand economic privation or po itical oppression."
And none of them seems to have been raised in a par icularly fundamentalist household.
Indeed, the top 9/11 operatives and ilots, like Mohammed Atta and Marwan al-Shehhi, who shared an partment in Hamburg, where they both attended the Technical Univer ity of Hamburg-Harburg, all seem to have been recruited to al-Qaeda hrough cells and prayer groups after they moved to Europe.
one of these plotters was recruited in the Middle East and then lanted in Europe years in advance by bin Laden, notes Karatnycky.
To he contrary, virtually all of them seem to have lived in Europe on their wn, grown alienated from the European society around them, gravitated o a local prayer group or mosque to find warmth and solidarity, undergone  "born-again" conversion, gotten radicalized by Islamist elements, gone ff for training in Afghanistan, and presto, a terrorist was born.
Their dis overy of religion was not just part of a personal search for meaning.
It went ar beyond fundamentalism.
They converted Islam into a political ideology,  religious totalitarianism.
Had the 9/11 hijackers been students at erkeley in the early 1970s, they would have been Trotskyite radicals.
"To nderstand the September 11 terrorists, we should have in mind the profile f the classic revolutionary: deracinated, middle class, shaped in part by ex le.
In other words, the image of Lenin in Zurich; or of Pol Pot or Ho Chi inh in Paris... For them Islamism is the new universal revolutionary reed, and bin Laden is Sheikh Guevara," writes Karatnycky.
"Like the eaders of America's Weather Underground, Germany's Baader-Meinhof  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ang, Italy's Red Brigades, and Japan's Red Army Faction, the Islamic errorists were university-educated converts to an all-encompassing neototalitarian ideology."
y friend Abdallah Schleifer, a journalism professor in Cairo, actu lly knew Ayman al-Zawahiri, bin Laden's number two and chief ideo ogue, when al-Zawahiri was a young doctor on his way to becoming a oung neo-Leninist Muslim revolutionary.
"Ayman was attracted from he time he was a teenager into a Utopian vision of an Islamic state," chleifer told me on a visit to Cairo.
But instead of being drawn to the raditional concern of religionthe relationship between oneself and odal-Zawahiri became drawn to religion as a political ideology.
Like  good Marxist or Leninist, al-Zawahiri was interested in "building the ingdom of God on earth," said Schleifer, and Islamism became his arxism his "utopian ideology."
And where Mohammed Atta meets l-Zawahiri is the intersection where rage and humiliation meet the ide logy that is going to make it all right.
"Ayman is saying to someone like ohammed Atta, 'You see injustice?
We have a systema system, mind ou, a systemthat will give you [justice], not a religion, because reli ion gives you inner peace.'
It doesn't necessarily solve any social prob em.
But [al-Zawahiri] is saying we have a system that will give you ustice.
You feel frustration?
We have a system that will enable you to lower.
The system is what we call Islamisman ideological, highly oliticized Islam, in which the spiritual contentthe personal relation hip [with God]  is taken out of Islam and instead it is transformed into  religious ideology like fascism or communism."
But unlike the Lenin sts, who wanted to install the reign of the perfect class, the working class, nd unlike Nazis, who wanted to install the reign of the perfect race, the ryan race, bin Laden and al-Zawahiri wanted to install the reign of the erfect religion.
nfortunately, bin Laden and his colleagues have found it all too easy o enlist recruits in the Arab-Muslim world.
I think this has to do, in part, ith the state of half-flatness that many Arab-Muslim young people are iving in, particularly those in Europe.
They have been raised to believe hat Islam is the most perfect and complete expression of God's monothe stic message and that the Prophet Muhammad is God's last and most per- HE UNFLAT WORLD eet messenger.
This is not a criticism.
This is Islam's self-identity.
Yet, in  flat world, these youth, particularly those living in Europe, can and do ook around and see that the Arab-Muslim world, in too many cases, has allen behind the rest of the planet.
It is not living as prosperously or dem cratically as other civilizations.
How can that be?
these young Arabs and uslims must ask themselves.
If we have the superior faith, and if our aith is all encompassing of religion, politics, and economics, why are oth rs living so much better?
his is a source of real cognitive dissonance for many Arab-Muslim ouththe sort of dissonance, and loss of self-esteem, that sparks rage nd leads some of them to join violent groups and lash out at the world.
t is also the sort of dissonance that leads many others, average folks, to ive radical groups like al-Qaeda passive support.
Again, the flattening of he world only sharpens that dissonance by making the backwardness of he Arab-Muslim region, compared to others, impossible to ignore.
It has ecome so impossible to ignore that some Arab-Muslim intellectuals ave started to point out this backwardness with brutal honesty and to de and solutions.
They do this in defiance of their authoritarian govern ents, which prefer to use their media not to encourage honest debate ut rather to blame all their problems on others on America, on Israel, r on a legacy of Western colonialism, on anything and anyone but the ead hand of these authoritarian regimes.
ccording to the second Arab Human Development Report, which as written in 2003 for the United Nations Development Program by a roup of courageous Arab social scientists, between 1980 and 1999, Arab ountries produced 171 international patents.
South Korea alone during hat same period registered 16,328 patents.
Hewlett-Packard registers, on verage, 11 new patents a day.
The average number of scientists and engi eers working in research and development in the Arab countries is 371 er million people, while the world average, including countries in Africa, sia, and Latin America, is 979, the report said.
This helps to explain why lthough massive amounts of foreign technology are imported to the Arab egions, very little of it is internalized or supplanted by Arab innovations.
etween 1995 and 1996, as many as 25 percent of the university graduates roduced in the Arab world immigrated to some Western country.
There  H E W O R L D IS F L A T re just eighteen computers per one thousand people in the Arab region oday, compared with the global average of seventy-eight per one thou and, and only 1.6 percent of the Arab population has Internet access.
hile Arabs represent almost 5 percent of the world population, the re ort said, they produce only 1 percent of the books published, and an un sually high percentage of those are religious booksover triple the orld average.
Of the eighty-eight million unemployed males between fif een and twenty-four worldwide, almost 26 percent are in the Middle East nd North Africa, according to an International Labor Organization study Associated Press, December 26, 2004).
he same study said the total population of Arab countries quadru led in the past fifty years, to almost three hundred million, with 37.5 ercent under fifteen, and three million coming onto the job market very year.
But the good jobs are not being produced at home, because he environment of openness required to attract international investment nd stimulate local innovation is all too rare in the Arab-Muslim world oday.
That virtuous cycle of universities spinning off people and ideas, nd then those people and ideas getting funded and creating new jobs, imply does not exist there.
Theodore Dalrymple is a physician and psy hiatrist who practices in England and writes a column for the London pectator.
He wrote an essay in the urban policy magazine City Journal Spring 2004) about what he learned from his contacts with Muslim outh in British prisons.
Dalrymple noted that most schools of Islam to ay treat the Qur'an as a divinely inspired text that is not open to any lit rary criticism or creative reinterpretation.
It is a sacred book to be emorized, not adapted to the demands and opportunities of modern ife.
But without a culture that encourages, and creates space for, such reative reinterpretation, critical thought and original thinking tend to ither.
This may explain why so few world-class scientific papers cited by ther scholars come out of the Arab-Muslim universities.
f the West had made Shakespeare "the sole object of our study and the ole guide of our lives," said Dalrymple, "we would soon enough fall into ackwardness and stagnation.
And the problem is that so many Muslims ant both stagnation and power: they want a return to the perfection of the HE UNFLAT WORLD eventh century and to dominate the twenty-first, as they believe is the irthright of their doctrine, the last testament of God to man.
If they were ontent to exist in a seventh-century backwater, secure in a quietist philos phy, there would be no problem for them or us; their problem, and ours, s that they want the power that free inquiry confers, without either the free nquiry or the philosophy and institutions that guarantee that free inquiry.
hey are faced with a dilemma: either they abandon their cherished reli ion, or they remain forever in the rear of human technical advance.
either alternative is very appealing, and the tension between their desire or power and success in the modern world on the one hand, and their de ire not to abandon their religion on the other, is resolvable for some only y exploding themselves as bombs.
People grow angry when faced with an ntractable dilemma; they lash out."
ndeed, talk to young Arabs and Muslims anywhere, and this cogni ive dissonance and the word "humiliation" always come up very quickly n conversation.
It was revealing that when Mahathir Mohammed made is October 16,2003, farewell speech as prime minister of Malaysia at an slamic summit he was hosting in his own country, he built his remarks o his fellow Muslim leaders around the question of why their civilization ad become so humiliateda term he used five times.
"I will not enu erate the instances of our humiliation," said Mahathir.
"Our only re ction is to become more and more angry.
Angry people cannot think roperly.
There is a feeling of hopelessness among the Muslim countries nd their people.
They feel they can do nothing right.
."
his humiliation is the key.
It has always been my view that terrorism s not spawned by the poverty of money.
It is spawned by the poverty of ignity.
Humiliation is the most underestimated force in international elations and in human relations.
It is when people or nations are hu iliated that they really lash out and engage in extreme violence.
When ou take the economic and political backwardness of much of the ArabMuslim world today, add its past grandeur and self-image of religious su eriority, and combine it with the discrimination and alienation these rab-Muslim males face when they leave home and move to Europe, or hen they grow up in Europe, you have one powerful cocktail of rage.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T s my friend the Egyptian playwright Ali Salem said of the 9/11 hijack rs, they "are walking the streets of life, searching for tall buildingsfor owers to bring down, because they are not able to be'tall like them."
fear that this sense of frustration that feeds recruits to bin Laden may et worse before it gets better.
In the old days, leaders could count on alls and mountains and valleys to obstruct their people's view and keep hem ignorant and passive about where they stood in comparison to oth rs.
You could see only to the next village.
But as the world gets flatter, eople can see for miles and miles.
n the flat world you get your humiliation dished up to you fiberoptically.
I stumbled across a fascinating example of this involving bin aden himself.
On January 4, 2004, bin Laden issued one of his taped essages through al-Jazeera, the satellite television network based in atar.
On March 7, the Web site of the Islamic Studies and Research enter published the entire text.
One paragraph jumped out at me.
It is n the middle of a section in which bin Laden is discussing the various vils of Arab rulers, particularly the Saudi ruling family.
Thus, the situation of all Arab countries suffers from great deteriora ion in all walks of life, in religious and worldly matters," says bin Laden.
It is enough to know that the economy of all Arab countries is weaker han the economy of one country that had once been part of our [Islamic] orld when we used to truly adhere to Islam.
That country is the lost ndalusia.
Spain is an infidel country, but its economy is stronger than ur economy because the ruler there is accountable.
In our countries, here is no accountability or punishment, but there is only obedience to he rulers and prayers of long life for them."
he hair on my arms stood up when I read that.
Why?
Because what in Laden was referring to was the first Arab Human Development eport, which came out in July 2002, well after he had been evicted rom Afghanistan and was probably hiding out in a cave somewhere.
The rab authors of the report wanted to grab the attention of the Arab world s to how far behind it had fallen.
So they looked for a country that had  GDP slightly more than that of all twenty-two Arab states combined.
hen they ran down the tables, the country that fit that bill perfectly was pain.
It could have been Norway or Italy, but Spain happened to have HE UNFLAT WORLD  GDP just slightly larger than all the Arab states together.
Somehow, bin aden heard or read about this first Arab Human Development Report rom his cave.
For all I know, he may have read my own column about t, which was the first to highlight the report and stressed the comparison ith Spain.
Or maybe he got it off the Internet.
The report was down oaded from the Internet some one million times.
So even though he was ff in a cave somewhere, he could still get this report, and its humiliating onclusion, shoved right in his facenegatively comparing the Arab tates to Spain, no less!
And when he heard that comparison, wherever he as hiding, bin Laden took it as an insult, as a humiliationthe notion hat Christian Spain, a country that was once controlled by Muslims, had  greater GDP today than all the Arab states combined.
The authors of his report were themselves Arabs and Muslims; they were not trying to umiliate anyonebut that was how bin Laden interpreted it.
And I am ertain he got this dose of humiliation over a modem at 56K.
They may ven have broadband now in Tora Bora.
nd having gotten his dose of humiliation this way, bin Laden and is emulators have learned to give it right back in the same coin.
Want to nderstand why the Islamo-Leninists behead Americans in Iraq and audi Arabia and then distribute pictures on the Internet with the bloody ead of the body resting on the headless corpse?
It is because there is no ore humiliating form of execution than chopping off someone's head.
t is a way of showing utter contempt for that person and his or her phys cal being.
It is no accident that the groups in Iraq who beheaded mericans dressed them first in the same orange jumpsuits that al-Qaeda risoners in Guantanamo Bay are forced to wear.
They had to learn bout those jumpsuits either over the Internet or satellite TV.
But it mazes me that in the middle of the Iraq war they were able to have the xact same jumpsuits made in Iraq to dress their prisoners in.
You hu iliate me, I humiliate you.
And what do you suppose terrorist leader bu Musab al-Zarqawi said in his audiotape released on September 11, 004, the third anniversary of 9/11?
He said, "The holy warriors made he international coalition taste humiliation .
lessons from which they re still burning."
The tape was titled "Where Is the Honor?"
s I said, however, this frustration and humiliation are not confined to  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he Islamistfringes.The reason the Islamo-Leninists have become the most nergized and pronounced opponents of globalization/Americanization nd the biggest threat to the flattening of the world today is not simply their xtraordinary violence, but also that they enjoy some passive support round the Arab-Muslim world.
n part, this is because most governments in the Arab-Muslim world ave refused to take on these radicals in a war of ideas.
While Arab egimes have been very active in jailing their Islamo-Leninists when they an find and arrest them, they have been very passive in countering them ith a modern, progressive interpretation of Islam.
This is because almost ll of these Arab-Muslim leaders are illegitimate themselves.
Having ome to power by force, they have no credibility as carriers of a moderate, rogressive Islam, and they always feel vulnerable to hard-line Muslim reachers, who denounce them for not being good Muslims.
So instead f taking on the Muslim radicals, the Arab regimes either throw them in ail or try to buy them off.
This leaves a terrible spiritual and political void.
ut the other reason for the passive support that the Islamo-Leninists njoyand the fact that they are able to raise so much money through harities and mosques in the Arab-Muslim world is that too many ood, decent people there feel the same frustration and tinge of humili tion that many of their most enraged youth do.
And there is a certain re pect for the way these violent youth have been ready to stand up to the orld and to their own leaders and defend the honor of their civilization.
hen I visited Qatar a few months after 9/11, a friend of mine there a weet, thoughtful, liberal person who works for the Qatari government onfided to me something in a whisper that was deeply troubling to him: My eleven-year-old son thinks bin Laden is a good man."
ost middle-class Arabs and Muslims, I am convinced, were not cel brating the death of three thousand innocent Americans on 9/11.1 know y Arab and Muslim friends were not.
But many Arabs and Muslims ere celebrating the idea of putting a fist in America's faceand they ere quietly applauding the men who did it.
They were happy to see omeone humiliating the people and the country that they felt was hu iliating them and supporting what they saw as injustice in their orldwhether it is America's backing of Arab kings and dictators who HE UNFLAT WORLD xport oil to it or America's backing of Israel whether it does the right hings or the wrong things.
ost American blacks, I am sure, had little doubt that O. J. Simpson urdered his ex-wife, but they applauded his acquittal as a stick in the ye of the Los Angeles Police Department and a justice system that they aw as consistently humiliating and unfair to them.
Humiliation does hat to people.
Bin Laden is to the Arab masses what O.J.
was to many merican blacksthe stick they poke in the eye of an "unfair" America nd their own leaders.
I once interviewed Dyab Abou Jahjah, often alled the Malcolm X of Belgium's alienated Moroccan youth.
I asked im what he and his friends thought when they saw the World Trade enter being smashed.
He said, "I think if we are honest with ourselves, ost of the Muslims all over the world felt that.
America got hit in the ace and that cannot be bad.
I don't want to make an intellectual answer or that.
I'll give it very simply.
America was kicking our butts for fifty ears.
And really badly.
Supporting the bullies in the region, whether it s Israel or our own regimes, [America] is giving us not only a bleeding ose, but breaking a lot of our necks."
ust as America's economic depression in the 1920s and 1930s made any normal, intelligent, thinking Americans passive or active support rs of communism, so the humiliating economic, military, and emo ional depression of the Arab-Muslim world has made too many normal, ntelligent, and thinking Arabs and Muslims passive supporters of bin adenism.
ormer Kuwaiti minister of information Dr. Sa'd Bin Tefla, a jour alist, wrote an essay in the London Arabic daily Al-Sharq Al-Awsat on he third anniversary of September 11 titled "We Are All Bin Laden," hich went right to this point.
He asked why it is that Muslim scholars nd clerics eagerly supported fatwas condemning Salman Rushdie to eath for writing an allegedly blasphemous novel, The Satanic Verses, that ove in themes about the Prophet Muhammad, but to this day no uslim cleric has issued a fatwa condemning Osama bin Laden for mur ering three thousand innocent civilians.
After the fatwa was declared gainst Salman Rushdie, Muslims staged protests against the book at ritish embassies all over the Islamic world and burned Salman Rushdie  H E W O R L D IS F L A T olls along with copies of his book.
Nine people were killed in an antiRushdie protest in Pakistan.
Religious legal rulings were disseminated one after another banning alman Rushdie s book and calling for him to be killed ," Bin Tefla wrote.
Iran earmarked a reward of $1 million for whoever would implement mam Khomeini's fatwa and kill Salman Rushdie."
And bin Laden?
othingno condemnation.
"Despite the fact that bin Laden murdered housands of innocents in the name of our religion and despite the dam ge that he has caused to Muslims everywhere, and especially to innocent uslims in the West, whose life is much better than the life of Muslims n Islamic lands, to this date not a single fatwa has been issued calling for he killing of bin Laden, on the pretext that bin Laden still proclaims there is no God other than Allah,'" Tefla wrote.
Worse, he added, Arab nd Muslim satellite television channels have "competed amongst them elves in broadcasting [bin Laden's] sermons and fatwas, instead of pre enting their dissemination as they did in the case of Rushdie's book .
ith our equivocal stance on bin Laden, we from the very start left the orld with the impression that we are all bin Laden."
ermany was humiliated after World War I, but it had the modern conomic foundations to produce a state response to that humiliation  n the form of the Third Reich.
The Arab world, by contrast, could not roduce a state response to its humiliation.
Instead, it has rattled the world tage in the last fifty years with two larger-than-life figures, rather than tates, noted political theorist Yaron Ezrahi: One was the Saudi oil minis er Ahmed Zaki Yamani, and the other was Osama bin Laden.
Each chieved global notoriety, each briefly held the world in his palm one y using oil as a weapon and the other by using the most unconventional uicide violence imaginable.
Each gave a temporary "high" to the ArabMuslim world, a feeling that it was exercising power on the world stage.
ut bin Laden and Yamani were only the illusions of power, noted zrahi: The Saudi oil weapon is economic power without productivity, nd bin Laden's terrorism weapon is military force without a real army, tate, economy, and engine of innovation to support it.
hat makes Yamanism and bin Ladenism so unfortunate as strategies or Arab influence in the world is that they ignore the examples within HE UNFLAT WORLD rab culture and civilizationwhen it was at its heightof discipline, ard work, knowledge, achievement, scientific inquiry, and pluralism.
As ayan Chanda, the editor of YaleGlobal Online, pointed out to me, it as the Arab-Muslim world that gave birth to algebra and algorithms, oth terms derived from Arabic words.
In other words, noted Chanda, The entire modern information revolution, which is built to a large de ree on algorithms, can trace its roots all the way back to Arab-Muslim ivilization and the great learning centers of Baghdad and Alexandria," hich first introduced these concepts, then transferred them to Europe hrough Muslim Spain.
The Arab-Muslim peoples have an incredibly ich cultural tradition and civilization, with long periods of success and nnovation to draw on for inspiration and example for their young eople.
They have all the resources necessary for modernization in their wn cultural terms, if they want to summon them.
nfortunately, there is huge resistance to such modernization from he authoritarian and religiously obscurantist forces within the ArabMuslim world.
That is why this part of the world will be liberated, and feel ruly empowered, only if it goes through its own war of ideasand the oderates there win.
We had a civil war in America some 150 years ago ver ideasthe ideas of tolerance, pluralism, human dignity, and equal ty.
The best thing outsiders can do for the Arab-Muslim world today is try o collaborate with its progressive forces in every way possiblefrom try ng to solve the Arab-Israeli conflict, to stabilizing Iraq, to signing freetrade agreements with as many Arab countries as possibleso as to foster  similar war of ideas within their civilization.
There is no other way.
therwise this part of the world has the potential to be a huge unflattening force.
We have to wish the good people there well.
But the battle will e one for them to fight and to win.
No one can do it for them.
o one has expressed what is needed better than Abdel Rahman l-Rashed, the general manager of the London-based al-Arabiya news hannel.
One of the best-known and most respected Arab journalists orking today, he wrote the following, in Al-Sharq Al-Awsat (September , 2004), after a series of violent incidents involving Muslim extremist roups from Chechnya to Saudi Arabia to Iraq: "Self-cure starts with selfrealization and confession.
We should then run after our terrorist sons, in  H E W O R L D IS F L A T he full knowledge that they are the sour grapes of a deformed culture .
he mosque used to be a haven, and the voice of religion used to be that f peace and reconciliation.
Religious sermons were warm behests for a oral order and an ethical life.
Then came the neo-Muslims.
An inno ent and benevolent religion, whose verses prohibit the felling of trees in he absence of urgent necessity, that calls murder the most heinous of rimes, that says explicitly that if you kill one person you have killed hu anity as a whole, has been turned into a global message of hate and a niversal war cry.
We cannot clear our names unless we own up to he shameful fact that terrorism has become an Islamic enterprise; an al ost exclusive monopoly, implemented by Muslim men and women.
e cannot redeem our extremist youth, who commit all these heinous rimes, without confronting the Sheikhs who thought it ennobling to einvent themselves as revolutionary ideologues, sending other people's ons and daughters to certain death, while sending their own children to uropean and American schools and colleges."
oo  ANY OYOTAS e problems of the too sick, the too disempowered, and the too hu iliated are all in their own ways keeping the world from becoming ntirely flat.
They may do so even more in the future, if they are not prop rly addressed.
But another enormously powerful threat to theflatteningof he world is on the horizon.
It is not a human resources constraint or a dis ase, but a natural resources constraint.
If millions of people from India, hina, Latin America, and the former Soviet Empire, who for years had een living largely outside the flat world, all start to walk onto the new flatworld platformeach with his or her own version of the American dream f owning a car, a house, a refrigerator, a microwave, and a toasterwe re, at best, going to experience a serious energy shortage.
At worst, we are oing to set off a global struggle for natural resources and junk up, heat p, garbage up, smoke up, and devour up our little planet faster than at ny time in the history of the world.
Be afraid.
I certainly am.
HE UNFLAT WORLD n his classic work Collapse, Jared Diamond points out that when hinking about the issue of sustainability, what counts is not just the umber of people inhabiting the planet Earth but the impact that their articular lifestyle is having on the environment.
If most of the world s six illion people today were in cold storage, neither eating, breathing, nor etabolizing, he argues, their impact on the environment would be inimal.
The problem we now face derives from the fact that we are not n a deep freeze.
We are consuming resources and generating waste nd how!
"That per capita impactthe resources consumed and the aste put out, by each personvaries greatly around the world, being ighest in the first world and lowest in the third world," Diamond writes.
On the average, each citizen of the U.S., Western Europe and Japan onsumes 32 times more resources, such as fossil fuels, and puts out 32 imes more waste, than do inhabitants of the Third World.
But low im act people are becoming high impact people."
ndeed.
The flattening of the world is making low-impact people into igh-impact people faster, in greater numbers, and with greater impacts han at any other time in the history of the world.
"There are many 'op imists,'" notes Diamond, "who argue that the world could support dou le its human population .
But I have not met anyone who seriously rgues that the world could support 12 times its current impact, although n increase of that factor would result from all Third World inhabitants dopting first world living standards."
And that is where we are heading.
s I mentioned earlier, I visited Beijing in the summer of 2004 with y wife and teenage daughter, Natalie.
Before we left, I said to Natalie, You're really going to like this city.
They have these big bicycle lanes on ll the main roads.
Maybe when we get there we can rent bikes and just ide around Beijing.
I did that last time I was there, and it was a lot of fun."
illy Tom.
I hadn't been to Beijing since 2001, and in just three years he explosive growth there had erased without a trace many of those harming bicycle lanes.
They had been either shrunken or eliminated to dd another lane for automobiles and buses.
The only biking I did there as on the stationary exercise bike in our hotel, which was a good antidote o all the time spent sitting in cars stuck in Beijing traffic jams.
I was in eijing to attend an international business conference, and while there I  H E W O R L D IS F L A T iscovered why all the bikes had disappeared.
According to one speaker at he conference, some thirty thousand new cars were being added to the oads in Beijing every monthont thousand more new cars a day!
I ound that statistic so unbelievable that I asked Michael Zhao, a young esearcher in the Times's Beijing bureau, to double-check it, and he rote me back the following e-mail: i Tom, Hope this email finds you well.
On your question about ow many cars are added each day in Beijing, I did some research n the Internet and found that... car sales in [Beijing] for April 004 were 43,00024.1% more than same period last year.
So hat is 1,433 cars added [daily] to Beijing, but including second and car sales.
New car sales this month were 30,000, or 1,000 cars ach day added to the city.
The total car sales from Jan. to April 004 were 165,000, that is about 1,375 cars added each day to eijing over this period.
This data is from the Beijing Municipal ureau of Commerce.
The city's bureau of statistics has it that the otal car sales in 2003 were 407,649, or 1,117 cars each day added.
he new car sales last year were 292,858, or 802 new cars each ay .
The total number of cars in Beijing is 2.1 million .
But he recent months seem to have witnessed surging sales.
Also note orthy is last year's SARS outbreak, during which period a lot of amilies bought cars, due to panic about public contact and a sort f doomsday-stimulated enjoy-life mentality.
And many new car wners did enjoy their time driving, as the traffic in the city so uch improved with a lot of people voluntarily caged at home, ithout daring to go out.
Since then, coupled with dropping car rices due to China's commitment to reduce tariffs after joining he WTO, a large number of families have advanced their time able of buying a car, although some others decided to wait for fur her drops of prices.
All the best, Michael he thirty thousand new cars a month in Beijing, and the cloud of aze that envelops the city on so many days, and the fact that the city's of icial Web site actually keeps track of "blue sky" days all testify to the envi- HE UNFLAT WORLD onmental destruction that could arise from the triple convergence if lean alternative renewable energies are not developed soon.
Already, ac ording to the World Bank, sixteen of the twenty most polluted cities in the orld are in China, and that pollution and environmental degradation to ether cost China $170 billion a year (The Economist, August 21, 2004).
nd we have not seen anything yet.
China, with its own oil and gas eserves, was once a net exporter.
Not anymore.
In 2003, China surged head of Japan as the second largest importer of oil in the world, after the nited States.
China's overall energy consumption is up 65 percent just rom 2002 to 2005, and it has not even begun to reach its capacity for in ustrialization.
here is a Wal-Mart in Shenzhen, China, that sold 1,100 air condi ioners in just one hot weekend in the summer of 2005.
One store!
hink of the environmental impact when there is a Wal-Mart in every ajor Chinese city.
ight now, about 700 to 800 million of China's 1.3 billion people still ive in the countryside, but they are heading for the flat world, and oughly half are expected to try to migrate to the cities over the next two ecades.
If they can find work, this great migration will spur a huge surge n demand for cars, houses, steel beams, power plants, school buildings, ewage plants, electricity grids.
No wonder then that a report in the inancial Times (August 16, 2005) noted that global energy demand has een growing since 2003 at about 2.5 times the rate of the prior decade, ith China and India accounting for about 35 percent of the world's in remental increase in oil consumption, even though they account for ust 15 percent of world output.
t the business conference I was attending in Beijing, I kept hearing eferences to the Strait of Malaccathe narrow passage between Malay ia and Indonesia that is patrolled by the U.S. Navy and controls all the il tanker traffic from the Middle East to China and Japan.
I hadn't eard anyone talking about the Strait of Malacca since the 1970s oil rises.
But evidently Chinese strategic planners have begun to grow in reasingly concerned that the United States could choke off China's conomy at any time by just closing the Strait of Malacca, and this threat s now being increasingly and openly discussed in Chinese military cir-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T les.
It is just a small hint of the potential struggle for powerenergy owerthat could ensue if the Great American Dream and the Great hinese Dream and the Great Indian Dream and the Great Russian ream come to be seen as mutually exclusive in energy terms.
on't kid yourself: China's foreign policy today consists of just two hingspreventing Taiwan from becoming independent and searching or oil and other natural resources.
"It is not a conspiracy on our part," a hinese foreign ministry official said to me of China's global quest for oil.
We're not trying to dominate anyone.
We were just latecomers to the ame and when we looked around we saw all the chairs were taken."
hina is particularly obsessed with acquiring secure oil supplies from ountries that would not retaliate against China if it invaded Taiwan, and his is driving Beijing to get cozy with some of the most despotic regimes n the world.
And the more desperate China becomes for oil, the more igorously it will use its veto at the UN Security Council to prevent sanc ions against its newfound providers of crude no matter what horrible hings they are doing on the world stage.
The Islamic fundamentalist gov rnment in Sudan now supplies China with 7 percent of its oil supplies, nd China has invested $3 billion in oil-drilling infrastructure there.
In eptember 2004, China threatened to veto a move by the United Nations o impose sanctions on Sudan for the genocide that it is perpetrating in its arfur province.
China has only reluctantly joined international efforts to revent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon.
Iran supplies 13 percent f China's oil supplies.
Meanwhile, as The Daily Telegraph reported November 19, 2004), China has begun drilling for gas in the East China ea, just west of the line that Japan regards as its border: "Japan protested, o no avail, that the project should be a joint one.
The two are also set to lash over Russia's oil wealth.
China is furious that Japan has outbid it in heir battle to determine the route of the pipeline that Russia intends to uild to the Far East."
At the same time it was reported that a Chinese nu lear submarine had accidentally strayed into Japanese territorial waters.
he Chinese government apologized for the "technical error."
If you be ieve that, I have an oil well in Hawaii I would like to sell you .
.. n 2004, China began competing with the United States for oil ex loration opportunities in Canada and Venezuela.
If China has its way, HE UNFLAT WORLD t will stick a straw into Canada and Venezuela and suck out every drop f oil, which will have the side effect of making America more depen ent on Saudi Arabia.
interviewed the Japanese manager of a major U.S. multinational hat is headquartered in northeastern China.
"China is following the ath of Japan and Korea," said the executive, on the condition that he nd his company not be quoted by name, "and the big question is, Can he world afford to have 1.3 billion people following that path and driv ng the same cars and using the same amount of energy?
So I see the flat ening, but the challenge of the twenty-first century is, Are we going to it another oil crisis?
The oil crisis in the 1970s coincided with Japan and urope rising.
[There was a time] when the U.S. was the only big con umer of oil, but when Japan and Europe came in, OPEC got the power.
ut when China and India come into being the consumers, it will be a uge challenge that is an order of magnitude different.
It is megapolitics.
he limits of growth in the 1970s were overcome with technology.
We ot smarter than before, equipment became more efficient, and energy onsumption per head was lower.
But now [with China, India, and ussia all coming on strong] it is multiplied by a factor of ten.
There is omething we really need to be serious about.
We cannot restrict China, Russia,] and India.
They will grow and they must grow."
ne thing we will not be able to do is tell young Indians, Russians, oles, or Chinese that just when they are arriving on the leveled playing ield, they have to hold back and consume less for the greater global ood.
While giving a talk to students at the Beijing College of Foreign ffairs, I spoke about the most important issues that could threaten lobal stability, including the competition for oil and other energy re ources that would naturally occur as China, India, and the former oviet Union began to consume more oil.
No sooner did I finish than a oung Chinese woman student shot up her hand and basically asked: Why should China have to restrain its energy consumption and worry bout the environment, when America and Europe got to consume all he energy they wanted when they were developing?"
I did not have a ood answer.
China is a high-pride country.
Telling China, India, and ussia to consume less could have the same geopolitical impact that the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T orld's inability to accommodate a rising Japan and Germany had after orld War I. f current trends hold, China will go from importing seven million bar els of oil today to fourteen million a day by 2012.
For the world to accom odate that increase, it would have to find another Saudi Arabia.
That is ot likely, which doesn't leave many good options.
"For geopolitical rea ons, we cannot tell them no, we cannot tell China and India, it is not your urn," said Philip K. Verleger Jr., a leading oil economist.
"And for moral easons, we have lost the ability to lecture anyone."
But if we do nothing, everal things will likely result.
First, gasoline prices will continue to go igher and higher.
Second, we will be strengthening some of the worst po itical systems in the worldlike Sudan, Iran, and Saudi Arabia.
And third, he environment will be damaged more and more.
Already, the newspaper eadlines in China every day are about energy shortages, blackouts, and rownouts.
U.S. officials estimate that twenty-four out of China's thirty-one rovinces are now experiencing power shortages.
e are all stewards of this planet, and the test for our generation is hether we will pass on this planet in as good or better shape than we ound it.
The flattening process is going to challenge that responsibility.
Aldo Leopold, the father of wildlife ecology, once said: 'The first rule of ntelligent tinkering is save all the pieces,' " remarked Glenn Prickett, se ior vice president of Conservation International.
"What if we don't?
hat if the three billion new entrants start gobbling up all the resources?
pecies and ecosystems can't adapt that fast, and we will lose a major por ion of the earth's remaining biological diversity."
Already, noted Prickett, f you look at what is happening in the Congo Basin, the Amazon, the rain orest of Indonesiathe last great wilderness areasyou find that they are eing devoured by China's growing appetite.
More and more palm oil is eing extracted from Indonesia and Malaysia, soybeans out of Brazil, tim er out of central Africa, and natural gas out of all of the above to serve hinaand, as a result, all sorts of natural habitats are threatened.
If hese trends go on unchecked, with the natural habitats being converted o farmland and urban areas, and the globe getting warmer, many of the urrently threatened species will be condemned to extinction.
he move to sharply reduce energy consumption has to come from HE UNFLAT WORLD ithin China, as the Chinese confront what the need for fossil fuel is do ng to their own environment and growth aspirations.
Fortunately, that is tarting to happen.
Listen to China's deputy minister of the environ ent, Pan Yue, in a stunning interview with Der Spiegel (March 7, 005): "Our raw materials are scarce, we don't have enough land, and ur population is constantly growing.
Currently, there are 1.3 billion eople living in China, that's twice as many as 50 years ago.
In 2020, here will be 1.5 billion people in China.
Cities are growing but desert reas are expanding at the same time; habitable and usable land has een halved over the past 50 years.
[China's GDP miracle] will end oon because the environment can no longer keep pace .
Half of the ater in our seven largest rivers is completely useless.
One third of the rban population is breathing polluted air .
We are convinced that a rospering economy automatically goes hand in hand with political sta ility.
And I think that's a major blunder .
If the gap between the poor nd the rich widens, then regions within China and the society as a hole will become unstable."
he best thing we in the United States can do to nudge China toward reater conservation is to set an example by changing our own con umption patterns.
That would give us some credibility to lecture others.
Restoring our moral standing on energy is now a vital national security nd environmental issue," said Verleger.
The second best thing we can o is put America's best brainpower and biggest economic muscles be ind developing emissions-free energy technologies and getting down he innovation and costs curves quickly so they hit the "China price"  he price at which China and other developing countries could afford to uy and deploy them at scale.
merica could do this today, but it would require an energy strategy hat is not simply the "sum of all lobbies," says Gal Luff, founding mem er of the Set America Free Coalition, a bipartisan alliance of national ecurity, labor, environmental, and religious groups that believe reduc ng our oil consumption is a national priority.
Rather, we would need a ew strategic approach to both conservation and the development of lean and renewable energies supported by a new coalition.
It is a phi osophy that I like to call "geo-greenism."
We geo-greens seek to combine  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nto a single political movement environmentalists who want to reduce ossil fuels that cause climate change, evangelicals who want to protect od's green earth and all His creation, and geostrategists who want to re uce our dependence on crude oil because it fuels some of the worst egimes in the world.
he reluctance of the Bush team to develop such a comprehensive eo-green strategywhich would strengthen the dollar, reduce our trade eficit, make America the world leader in combating climate change, nd stimulate U.S. companies to take the lead in producing the green echnologies that the world will desperately need as China and India in ustrializehas been so irresponsible that it takes your breath away.
This s especially true when you realize that the solutions to many of our prob ems are already here.
We don't need to reinvent the wheel or wait for ci-fi hydrogen fuel cells or dramatically cut back our standard of living n order to get green.
All we need is some leadership.
The worst energy eficit we have right now is among our leaderswho lack the energy to magine alternatives to the path we are on and lack the will to push us in  new, geo-green direction.
f you have put a windmill in your yard or some solar panels on your oof, bless your heart.
But we will green the world only when we change he very nature of the electricity gridmoving it away from dirty coal, as, and oil to clean coal, nuclear, wind, and solar.
And that will be a uge industrial project, bigger than any politician has ever explained to he American people.
It will require a president and a Congress with the uts to undertake a "Green New Deal"where government's role is not unding vast projects, like the original New Deal, but seeding basic re earch, providing loan guarantees where needed, and setting standards, egulations, taxes, and incentives that will shape the market and spawn ne thousand new clean-tech companies, focused on everything from ower generation to biofuels to more efficient transportation to green uildings.
Green New Deal today requires getting two things right: govern ent regulations and prices.
Look at California.
By setting steadily igher standards for the energy efficiency of buildings and appliances  nd creating incentives for utilities to work with consumers to use less HE UNFLAT WORLD owerCalifornia has held its per capita electricity use roughly constant or thirty years, while the rest of the nation has seen per capita electricity se increase by nearly 50 percent, according to the Natural Resources efense Council.
This kind of energy conservation has saved California rom building twenty-four giant power plants.
High standards force in ovation, and innovation leads to conservation at scale.
ut prices also matter.
I don't care whether it is a higher federal gaso ine tax, a carbon tax, a BTU tax, or a cap-and-trade system, power utili ies, factories, and car owners have to be required to pay the real and full ost to society of the carbon we put into the atmosphere.
And higher osts for fossil fuels make more costly clean alternatives more competi ive.
"The regulated utilities are the most important consumers from the erspective of long-term investment, and if they are not required to value arbon reduction, then they will underinvest in energy efficiency and re ewable energy," said Peter Darbee, chairman of Pacific Gas & Electric.
ny energy policy that does not have increasingly high efficiency stan ards and higher prices for fossil fuels is not an energy policy at all.
he public is ready to be led on this issue.
The business community s already moving, because more and more companies are finding that perating clean and green saves money and is a competitive advantage.
o enough of this nonsense that conservation, energy efficiency, and environmentalism are hobbies we can't afford.
I can't think of anything ore cowardly or un-American or less realistic than that view.
Real pa riots, real advocates of spreading democracy around the world, real en repreneurs, live, invest, build, and think green.
reen is the new red, white, and blue.
IXTEEN he Dell Theory of Conflict Prevention ld-Time Versus ust-in-Time ree Trade is God's diplomacy.
There is no other certain way of uniting people n the bonds of peace.
British politician Richard Cobden, 1857  fore I share with you the subject of this chapter, I have to tell you  little bit about the computer that I wrote this book on.
It's related o the theme I am about to discuss.
This book was largely written n a Dell Inspiron 600m notebook, service tag number 9ZRJP41.
As part f the research for this book, I visited with the management team at Dell ear Austin, Texas.
I shared with them the ideas in this book and in re urn I asked for one favor: I asked them to trace for me the entire global upply chain that assembled the pieces that built the laptop that wrote he book.
Yes, I wanted to know every part that went into my Dell note ook, what country it came from, and, if possible, the names of the eople who put it together along the way.
Here is what I found out.
y computer was conceived when I phoned Dell's 800 number on pril 2, 2004, and was connected to sales representative Mujteba Naqvi, ho immediately entered my order into Dell's order management sys em.
He typed in both the type of notebook I ordered as well as the special eatures I wanted, along with my personal information, shipping address, illing address, and credit card information.
My credit card was verified y Dell through its work flow connection with Visa, and my order was hen released to Dell's production system.
Dell has six factories around HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T P R E V E N T I O N he world in Limerick, Ireland; Xiamen, China; Eldorado do Sul, razil; Nashville, Tennessee; Austin, Texas; and Penang, Malaysia.
My rder went out by e-mail to the Dell notebook factory in Malaysia, where he parts for the computer were immediately ordered from the supplier ogistics centers (SLCs) next to the Penang factory.
Surrounding every ell factory in the world are these supplier logistics centers, owned by he different suppliers of Dell parts.
These SLCs are like staging areas.
If ou are a Dell supplier anywhere in the world, your job is to keep your LC full of your specific parts so they can constantly be trucked over to he Dell factory for just-in-time manufacturing.
In an average day, we sell 140,000 to 150,000 computers," explained ick Hunter, one of Dell's three global production managers.
"Those or ers come in over Dell.com or over the telephone.
As soon as these orders ome in, our suppliers know about it.
They get a signal based on every omponent in the machine you ordered, so the supplier knows just what e has to deliver.
If you are supplying power cords for desktops, you can ee minute by minute how many power cords you are going to have to de iver."
Every two hours, the Dell factory in Penang sends an e-mail to the arious SLCs nearby, telling each one what parts and what quantities of hose parts it wants delivered within the next ninety minutesand not ne minute later.
Within ninety minutes, trucks from the various SLCs round Penang pull up to the Dell manufacturing plant and unload the arts needed for all those notebooks ordered in the last two hours.
This oes on all day, every two hours.
As soon as those parts arrive at the factory, t takes thirty minutes for Dell employees to unload the parts, register their ar codes, and put them into the bins for assembly.
"We know where very part in every SLC is in the Dell system at all times," said Hunter.
o where did the parts for my notebook come from?
I asked Hunter.
o begin with, he said, the notebook was codesigned in Austin, Texas, and n Taiwan by a team of Dell engineers and a team of Taiwanese notebook esigners.
"The customer's needs, required technologies, and Dell's de ign innovations were all determined by Dell through our direct rela ionship with customers," he explained.
"The basic design of the otherboard and case the basic functionality of your machinewas esigned to those specifications by an ODM [original design manufac-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T urer] in Taiwan.
We put our engineers in their facilities and they come to ustin and we actually codesign these systems.
This global teamwork rings an added benefita globally distributed virtually twenty-fourhour-per-day development cycle.
Our partners do the basic electronics nd we help them design customer and reliability features that we know ur customers want.
We know the customers better than our suppliers nd our competition, because we are dealing directly with them every ay."
Dell notebooks are completely redesigned roughly every twelve onths, but new features are constandy added during the yearthrough he supply chainas the hardware and software components advance.
t happened that when my notebook order hit the Dell factory in enang, one part was not availablethe wireless carddue to a quality ontrol issue, so the assembly of the notebook was delayed for a few days.
hen the truck full of good wireless cards arrived.
On April 13, at 0:15 a.m., a Dell Malaysia worker pulled the order slip that automati ally popped up once all my parts had arrived from the SLCs to the enang factory.
Another Dell Malaysia employee then took out a "trav ler"a special carrying tote designed to hold and protect partsand tarted plucking all the parts that went into my notebook.
here did those parts come from?
Dell uses multiple suppliers for ost of the thirty key components that go into its notebooks.
That way if ne supplier breaks down or cannot meet a surge in demand, Dell is not eft in the lurch.
So here are the key suppliers for my Inspiron 600m note ook: The Intel microprocessor came from an Intel factory either in the hilippines, Costa Rica, Malaysia, or China.
The memory came from a orean-owned factory in Korea (Samsung), a Taiwanese-owned factory in aiwan (Nanya), a German-owned factory in Germany (Infineon), or a apanese-owned factory in Japan (Elpida).
My graphics card was shipped rom either a Taiwanese-owned factory in China (MSI) or a Chinese-run actory in China (Foxconn).
The cooling fan came from a Taiwaneseowned factory in Taiwan (CCI or Auras).
The motherboard came from ei her a Korean-owned factory in Shanghai (Samsung), a Taiwanese-owned actory in Shanghai (Quanta), or a Taiwanese-owned factory in Taiwan Compal or Wistron).
The keyboard came from either a Japanese-owned ompany in Tianjin, China (Alps), a Taiwanese-owned factory in Shen- HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T P R E V E N T I O N hen, China (Sunrex), or a Taiwanese-owned factory in Suzhou, China Darfon).
The L C D was made in either South Korea (Samsung or G.Philips LCD), Japan (Toshiba or Sharp), or Taiwan (Chi Mei ptoelectronics, Hannstar Display, or AU Optronics).
The wireless card ame from either an American-owned factory in China (Agere) or alaysia (Arrow), or a Taiwanese-owned factory in Taiwan (Askey or emtek) or China (USI).
The modem was made by either a Taiwaneseowned company in China (Asustek or Liteon) or a Chinese-run com any in China (Foxconn).
The battery came from an American-owned actory in Malaysia (Motorola), a Japanese-owned factory in Mexico or alaysia or China (Sanyo), or a South Korean or Taiwanese factory in ither of those two countries (SDI or Simplo).
The hard disk drive was ade by an American-owned factory in Singapore (Seagate), a Japaneseowned company in Thailand (Hitachi or Fujitsu), or a Japanese-owned actory in the Philippines (Toshiba).
The CD/DVD drive came from a outh Korean-owned company with factories in Indonesia and the hilippines (Samsung); a Japanese-owned factory in China or Malaysia NEC); a Japanese-owned factory in Indonesia, China, or Malaysia Teac); or a Japanese-owned factory in China (Sony).
The notebook car ying bag was made by either an Irish-owned company in China (Tenba) r an American-owned company in China (Targus, Samsonite, or Pacific esign).
The power adapter was made by either a Thai-owned factory in hailand (Delta) or a Taiwanese-, Korean-, or American-owned factory in hina (Liteon, Samsung, or Mobility).
The power cord was made by a ritish-owned company with factories in China, Malaysia, and India Volex).
The removable memory stick was made by either an Israeliowned company in Israel (M-System) or an American-owned company ith a factory in Malaysia (Smart Modular).
his supply chain symphonyfrom my order over the phone to roduction to delivery to my house is one of the wonders of the flat orld.
We have to do a lot of collaborating," said Hunter.
"Michael [Dell] ersonally knows the CEOs of these companies, and we are constantly orking with them on process improvements and real-time demand/ upply balancing."
Demand shaping goes on constantly, said Hunter.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T hat is "demand shaping"?
It works like this: At 10 a.m. Austin time, ell discovers that so many customers have ordered notebooks with 0-gigabyte hard drives since the morning that its supply chain will run hort in two hours.
That signal is automatically relayed to Dell's market ng department and to Dell.com and to all the Dell phone operators tak ng orders.
If I happen to call to place my Dell order at 10:30 a.m., the ell representative will say to me, "Tom, it's your lucky day!
For the next our we are offering 60-gigabyte hard drives with the notebook you antfor only $10 more than the 40-gig drive.
And if you act now, Dell ill throw in a carrying case along with your purchase, because we so alue you as a customer."
In an hour or two, using such promotions, Dell an reshape the demand for any part of any notebook or desktop to cor espond with the projected supply in its global supply chain.
Today emory might be on sale, tomorrow it might be CD-ROMs.
icking up the story of my notebook, on April 13, at 11:29 a.m., all he parts had been plucked from the just-in-time inventory bins in enang, and the computer was assembled there by A. Sathini, a team ember "who manually screwed together all of the parts from kitting as ell as the labels needed for Tom's system," said Dell in their production eport to me.
"The system was then sent down the conveyor to go to urn, where Tom's specified software was downloaded."
Dell has huge erver banks stocked with the latest in Microsoft, Norton Utilities, and ther popular software applications, which are downloaded into each ew computer according to the specific tastes of the customer.
By 2:45 p.m., Tom's software had been successfully downloaded, and the system was] manually moved to the boxing line.
By 4:05 p.m., Tom's ystem [was] placed in protective foam and a shuttle box, with a label, hich contains his order number, tracking code, system type, and ship ing code.
By 6:04 p.m., Tom's system had been loaded on a pallet with  specified manifest, which gives the Merge facility visibility to when he system will arrive, what pallet it will be on (out of 754- pallets with 52 systems per pallet), and to what address Tom's system will ship.
By :26 p.m., Tom's system left [the Dell factory] to head to the Penang, alaysia, airport."
ix days a week Dell charters a China Airlines 747 out of Taiwan and HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION lies it from Penang to Nashville via Taipei.
Each 747 leaves with twentyfive thousand Dell notebooks that weigh altogether 110,000 kilograms, r 242,506 pounds.
It is the only 747 that ever lands in Nashville, except ir Force One, when the president visits.
"By April 15, 2004, at 7:41 .m., Tom's system arrived at [Nashville] with other Dell systems from enang and Limerick.
By 11:58 a.m., Tom's system [was] inserted into a arger box, which went down the boxing line to the specific external parts hat Tom had ordered."
hat was thirteen days after I'd ordered it.
Had there not been a parts elay in Malaysia when my order first arrived, the time between when I honed in my purchase, when the notebook was assembled in Penang, nd its arrival in Nashville would have been only four days.
Hunter said he total supply chain for my computer, including suppliers of suppliers, nvolved about four hundred companies in North America, Europe, and rimarily Asia, but with thirty key players.
Somehow, though, it all came ogether.
As Dell reported: On April 15, 2004, at 12:59 p.m., "Tom's sys em had been shipped from [Nashville] and was tenured by UPS ship ing LTL (3-5-day ground, specified by Tom), with UPS tracking umber 1Z13WA374253514697.
By April 19, 2004, at 6:41 p.m., Tom's ystem arrived in Bethesda, MD, and was signed for."
m telling you the story of my notebook to tell a larger story of geopol tics in the flat world.
To all the forces mentioned in the previous chap er that are still holding back the flattening of the world, or could actually everse the process, one has to add a more traditional threat, and that is an utbreak of a good, old-fashioned, world-shaking, economy-destroying ar.
It could be China deciding once and for all to eliminate Taiwan as n independent state; or North Korea, out of fear or insanity, using one of ts nuclear weapons against South Korea or Japan; or Israel and a soon-tobe-nuclear Iran going at each other; or India and Pakistan finally nuking t out.
These and other classic geopolitical conflicts could erupt at any ime and either slow the flattening of the world or seriously unflatten it.
he real subject of this chapter is how these classic geopolitical hreats might be moderated or influenced by the new forms of collabo-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ation fostered and demanded by the flat worldparticularly supplychaining.
The flattening of the world is too young for us to draw any de initive conclusions.
What is certain, though, is that as the world flattens, ne of the most interesting dramas to watch in international relations ill be the interplay between the traditional global threats and the newly mergent global supply chains.
The interaction between old-time threats like China versus Taiwan) and just-in-time supply chains (like China lus Taiwan) will be a rich source of study for the field of international elations in the early twenty-first century.
n The Lexus and the Olive Tree I argued that to the extent that countries ied their economies and futures to global integration and trade, it would act s a restraint on going to war with their neighbors.
I first started thinking bout this in the late 1990s, when, during my travels, I noticed that no two ountries that both had McDonald s had ever fought a war against each ther since each got its McDonald's.
(Border skirmishes and civil wars don't ount, because McDonald's usually served both sides.)
After confirming his with McDonald's, I offered what I called the Golden Arches Theory of onflict Prevention.
The Golden Arches Theory stipulated that when a ountry reached the level of economic development where it had a middle lass big enough to support a network of McDonald's, it became a cDonald's country.
And people in McDonald's countries didn't like to ight wars anymore.
They preferred to wait in line for burgers.
While this as offered slightly tongue in cheek, the serious point I was trying to ake was that as countries got woven into the fabric of global trade and ising living standards, which having a network of McDonald's fran hises had come to symbolize, the cost of war for victor and vanquished ecame prohibitively high.
his McDonald's theory has held up pretty well, but now that almost very country has acquired a McDonald's, except the worst rogues like orth Korea and Iran, it seemed to me that this theory needed updating or the flat world.
In that spirit, and again with tongue slightly in cheek,  offer the Dell Theory of Conflict Prevention, the essence of which is hat the advent and spread of just-in-time global supply chains in the flat orld are an even greater restraint on geopolitical adventurism than the ore general rising standard of living that McDonald's symbolized.
HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T REVENTION he Dell Theory stipulates: No two countries that are both part of a ajor global supply chain, like Dell's, will ever fight a war against each ther as long as they are both part of the same global supply chain.
ecause people embedded in major global supply chains don't want to ight old-time wars anymore.
They want to make just-in-time deliveries f goods and servicesand enjoy the rising standards of living that come ith that.
One of the people with the best feel for the logic behind this heory is Michael Dell, the founder and chairman of Dell.
These countries understand the risk premium that they have," said ell of the countries in his Asian supply chain.
"They are pretty careful o protect the equity that they have built up or tell us why we should not orry [about their doing anything adventurous].
My belief after visiting hina is that the change that has occurred there is in the best interest of he world and China.
Once people get a taste for whatever you want to all iteconomic independence, a better lifestyle, and a better life for heir child or childrenthey grab on to that and don't want to give it up."
ny sort of war or prolonged political upheaval in East Asia or China would have a massive chilling effect on the investment there and on all he progress that has been made there," said Dell, who added that he be ieves the governments in that part of the world understand this very learly.
"We certainly make clear to them that stability is important to us.
Right now] it is not a day-to-day worry for us .
I believe that as time nd progress go on there, the chance for a really disruptive event goes own exponentially.
I don't think our industry gets enough credit for the ood we are doing in these areas.
If you are making money and being roductive and raising your standard of living, you're not sitting around hinking, Who did this to us?
or Why is our life so bad?"
here is a lot of truth to this.
Countries whose workers and industries re woven into a major global supply chain know that they cannot take n hour, a week, or a month off for war without disrupting industries and conomies around the world and thereby risking the loss of their place in hat supply chain for a long time, which could be extremely costly.
For a ountry with no natural resources, being part of a global supply chain is ike striking oiloil that never runs out.
And therefore, getting dropped rom such a chain because you start a war is like having your oil wells go  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ry or having someone pour cement down them.
They will not come ack anytime soon.
You are going to pay for it really dearly," said Glenn E. Neland, senior ice president for worldwide procurement at Dell, when I asked him what ould happen to a major supply-chain member in Asia that decided to tart fighting with its neighbor and disrupt the supply chain.
"It will not nly bring you to your knees [today], but you will pay for a long time ecause you just won't have any credibility if you demonstrate you are go ng to go [off] the political deep end.
And China is just now starting to evelop a level of credibility in the business community that it is creating  business environment you can prosper inwith transparent and consis ent rules."
Neland said that suppliers regularly ask him whether he is orried about China and Taiwan, which have threatened to go to war at everal points in the past half century, but his standard response is that he annot imagine them "doing anything more than flexing muscles with ach other."
Neland said he can tell in his conversations and dealings ith companies and governments in the Dell supply chain, particularly he Chinese, that "they recognize the opportunity and are really hungry o participate in the same things they have seen other countries in Asia do.
hey know there is a big economic pot at the end of the rainbow and they re really after it.
We will spend about $35 billion producing parts this ear, and 30 percent of that is [in] China."
f you follow the evolution of supply chains, added Neland, you see he prosperity and stability they promoted first in Japan, and then in orea and Taiwan, and now in Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines, hailand, and Indonesia.
Once countries get embedded in these global upply chains, "they feel part of something much bigger than their own usinesses," he said.
Osamu Watanabe, the C E O of the Japan External rade Organization, was explaining to me one afternoon in Tokyo how apanese companies were moving vast amounts of low- and middlerange technical work and manufacturing to China, doing the basic fab ication there, and then bringing it back to Japan for final assembly.
apan was doing this despite a bitter legacy of mistrust between the two ountries, which was intensified by the Japanese invasion of China in he last century.
Historically, he noted, a strong Japan and a strong China HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION ave had a hard time coexisting.
But not today, at least not for the mo ent.
Why not?
I asked.
The reason you can have a strong Japan and a trong China at the same time, he said, "is because of the supply chain."
t is a win-win for both.
bviously, since Iraq, Syria, south Lebanon, North Korea, Pakistan, fghanistan, and Iran are not part of any major global supply chains, all of hem remain hot spots that could explode at any time and slow or reverse he flattening of the world.
As my own notebook story attests, the most im ortant test case of the Dell Theory of Conflict Prevention is the situation etween China and Taiwansince both are deeply embedded in several f the world's most important computer, consumer electronics, and, in reasingly, software supply chains.
The vast majority of computer compo ents for every major company come from coastal China, Taiwan, and ast Asia.
In addition, Taiwan alone has more than $100 billion in in estments in mainland China today, and Taiwanese experts run many of he cutting-edge Chinese high-tech manufacturing companies.
t is no wonder that Craig Addison, the former editor of Electronic usiness Asia magazine, wrote an essay for the International Herald Tribune September 29, 2000) headlined "A 'Silicon Shield' Protects Taiwan from hina."
He argued that "Silicon-based products, such as computers and etworking systems, form the basis of the digital economies in the United tates, Japan and other developed nations.
In the past decade, Taiwan as become the third-largest information technology hardware producer fter the United States and Japan.
Military aggression by China against aiwan would cut off a large portion of the world's supply of these prod cts .
Such a development would wipe trillions of dollars off the mar et value of technology companies listed in the United States, Japan and urope."
Even if China's leaders, like former president Jiang Zemin, ho was once minister of electronics, lose sight of how integrated China nd Taiwan are in the world's computer supply chain, they need only ask heir kids for an update.
Jiang Zemin's son, Jiang Mianheng, wrote ddison, "is a partner in a wafer fabrication project in Shanghai with inston Wang of Taiwan's Grace T.H.W.
Group."
And it is not just aiwanese.
Hundreds of big American tech companies now have R & D perations in China; a war that disrupted them could lead not only to the  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ompanies moving their plants elsewhere but also to a significant loss of  & D investment in China, which the Beijing government has been bet ing on to advance its development.
Such a war could also, depending on ow it started, trigger a widespread American boycott of Chinese goods f China were to snuff out the Taiwanese democracywhich would lead o serious economic turmoil inside China.
he Dell Theory had its first real test in December 2004, when aiwan held parliamentary elections.
President Chen Shui-bian's proindependence Democratic Progressive Party was expected to win the egislative runoff over the main opposition Nationalist Party, which fa ored closer ties with Beijing.
Chen framed the election as a popular ref rendum on his proposal to write a new constitution that would formally nshrine Taiwan's independence, ending the purposely ambiguous sta us quo.
Had Chen won and moved ahead on his agenda to make aiwan its own motherland, as opposed to maintaining the status quo fic ion that it is a province of the mainland, it could have led to a Chinese ilitary assault on Taiwan.
Everyone in the region was holding his or her reath.
And what happened?
Motherboards won over motherland.
A ma ority of Taiwanese voted against the pro-independence governing party egislative candidates, ensuring that the DPP would not have a majority n parliament.
I believe the message Taiwanese voters were sending was ot that they never want Taiwan to be independent.
It was that they do ot want to upset the status quo right now, which has been so beneficial o so many Taiwanese.
The voters seemed to understand clearly how in erwoven they had become with the mainland, and they wisely opted to aintain their de facto independence rather than force de jure inde endence, which might have triggered a Chinese invasion and a very ncertain future.
arning: What I said when I put forth the McDonald's theory, I ould repeat even more strenuously with the Dell Theory: It does not ake wars obsolete.
And it does not guarantee that governments will not ngage in wars of choice, even governments that are part of major supply hains.
To suggest so would be naive.
It guarantees only that govern ents whose countries are enmeshed in global supply chains will have o think three times, not just twice, about engaging in anything but a war HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION f self-defense.
And if they choose to go to war anyway, the price they will ay will be ten times higher than it was a decade ago and probably ten imes higher than whatever the leaders of that country think.
It is one hing to lose your McDonald's.
It's quite another to fight a war that costs ou your place in a twenty-first-century supply chain that may not come ack around for a long time.
T 7hile the biggest test case of the Dell Theory is China versus  V Taiwan, the fact is that the Dell Theory has already proved itself o some degree in the case of India and Pakistan, the context in which I irst started to think about it.
I happened to be in India in 2002, when its ust-in-time services supply chains ran into some very old-time geopoli icsand the supply chain won.
In the case of India and Pakistan, the ell Theory was working on only one partyIndiabut it still had a ajor impact.
India is to the world's knowledge and service supply chain hat China and Taiwan are to the manufacturing ones.
By now readers f this book know all the highlights: General Electric's biggest research enter outside the United States is in Bangalore, with seventeen hun red Indian engineers, designers, and scientists.
The brain chips for any brand-name cell phones are designed in Bangalore.
Renting a car rom Avis online?
It's managed in Bangalore.
Tracing your lost luggage n Delta or British Airways is done from Bangalore, and the backroom ccounting and computer maintenance for scores of global firms are one from Bangalore, Mumbai, Chennai, and other major Indian cities.
ere's what happened: On May 31, 2002, State Department spokes an Richard Boucher issued a travel advisory saying, "We urge American itizens currently in India to depart the country," because the prospect of  nuclear exchange with Pakistan was becoming very real.
Both nations ere massing troops on their borders, intelligence reports were suggesting hat they both might be dusting off their nuclear warheads, and CNN as flashing images of people flooding out of India.
The global merican firms that had moved their back rooms and R & D operations o Bangalore were deeply unnerved.
I was actually surfing on the Web, and I saw a travel advisory come  H E W O R L D IS F L A T p on India on a Friday evening," said Vivek Paul, president of Wipro, hich manages backroom operations from India of many American ultinationals.
"As soon as I saw that, I said, 'Oh my gosh, every cus omer that we have is going to have a million questions on this.'
It was the riday before a long weekend, so over the weekend we at Wipro devel ped a fail-safe business continuity plan for all of our customers."
While ipro's customers were pleased to see how on top of things the company as, many of them were nevertheless rattled.
This was not in the plan hen they decided to outsource mission-critical research and operations o India.
Said Paul, "I had a CIO from one of our big American clients end me an e-mail saying, 'I am now spending a lot of time looking for al ernative sources to India.
I don't think you want me doing that, and I on't want to be doing it.'
I immediately forwarded his message to the ndian ambassador in Washington and told him to get it to the right per on."
Paul would not tell me what company it was, but I have confirmed hrough diplomatic sources that it was United Technologies.
And plenty f others, like American Express and General Electric, with back rooms n Bangalore, had to have been equally worried.
or many global companies, "the main heart of their business is now upported here," said N. Krishnakumar, president of MindTree, another eading Indian knowledge outsourcing firm based in Bangalore.
"It can ause chaos if there is a disruption."
While not trying to meddle in foreign ffairs, he added, "What we explained to our government, through the onfederation of Indian Industry, is that providing a stable, predictable op rating environment is now the key to India's development."
This was a eal education for India's elderly leaders in New Delhi, who had not fully bsorbed how critical India had become to the world's knowledge supply hain.
When you are managing vital backroom operations for American xpress or General Electric or Avis, or are responsible for tracing all the ost luggage on British Airways or Delta, you cannot take a month, a week, r even a day off for war without causing major disruptions for those com anies.
Once those companies have made a commitment to outsource usiness operations or research to India, they expect it to stay there.
That s a major commitment.
And if geopolitics causes a serious disruption, HE D E L L THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION hey will leave, and they will not come back very easily.
When you lose his kind of service trade, you can lose it for good.
What ends up happening in the flat world you described," explained aul, "is that you have only one opportunity to make it right if something goes] wrong.
Because the disadvantage of being in a flat world is that de pite all the nice engagements and stuff and the exit barriers that you ave, every customer has multiple options, and so the sense of responsi ility you have is not just out of a desire to do good by your customers, ut also a desire for self-preservation."
he Indian government got the message.
Was India's central place in he world's services supply chain the only factor in getting Prime Minister ajpayee to tone down his rhetoric and step back from the brink?
Of ourse not.
There were other factors, to be suremost notably the de errent effect of Pakistan's own nuclear arsenal.
But clearly, India's role in lobal services was an important additional source of restraint on its be avior, and it was taken into account by New Delhi.
"I think it sobered a ot of people," said Jerry Rao, who heads the Indian high-tech trade asso iation.
"We engaged very seriously, and we tried to make the point that his was very bad for Indian business.
It was very bad for the Indian econ my .
[Many people] didn't realize till then how suddenly we had be ome integrated into the rest of the world.
We are now partners in a wenty-four by seven by three-sixty-five supply chain."
ivek Kulkarni, then information technology secretary for Bangalore's egional government, told me back in 2002, "We don't get involved in olitics, but we did bring to the government's attention the problems the ndian IT industry might face if there were a war."
And this was an alto ether new factor for New Delhi to take into consideration.
"Ten years go, [a lobby of IT ministers from different Indian states] never existed," aid Kulkarni.
Now it is one of the most important business lobbies in ndia and a coalition that no Indian government can ignore.
With all due respect, the McDonald's [shutting] down doesn't hurt nything," said Vivek Paul, "but if Wipro had to shut down we would affect he day-to-day operations of many, many companies."
No one would an wer the phones in call centers.
Many e-commerce sites that are supported  H E W O R L D IS F L A T rom Bangalore would shut down.
Many major companies that rely on ndia to maintain their key computer applications or handle their human esources departments or billings would seize up.
And these companies id not want to find alternatives, said Paul.
Switching is very difficult, be ause taking over mission-critical day-to-day backroom operations of a lobal company takes a great deal of training and experience.
It's not like pening a fast-food restaurant.
That was why, said Paul, Wipro's clients ere telling him, "'I have made an investment in you.
I need you to be ery responsible with the trust I have reposed in you.'
And I think that cre ted an enormous amount of back pressure on us that said we have to act n a responsible fashion .
All of a sudden it became even clearer that here's more to gain by economic gains than by geopolitical gains.
[We had ore to gain from building] a vibrant, richer middle class able to create an xport industry than we possibly could by having an ego-satisfying war with akistan."
The Indian government also looked around and realized that he vast majority of India's billion people were saying, "I want a better fu ure, not more territory."
Over and over again, when I asked young Indians orking at call centers how they felt about Kashmir or a war with Pakistan, hey waved me off with the same answer: "We have better things to do."
nd they do.
America needs to keep this in mind as it weighs its overall ap roach to outsourcing.
I would never advocate shipping some American's ob overseas just so it will keep Indians and Pakistanis at peace with one an ther.
But I would say that to the extent that this process happens, driven y its own internal economic logic, it will have a net positive geopolitical ffect.
It will absolutely make the world safer for American kids.
ach of the Indian business leaders I interviewed noted that in the vent of some outrageous act of terrorism or aggression from Pakistan, ndia would do whatever it takes to defend itself, and they would be the irst to support thatthe Dell Theory be damned.
Sometimes war is un voidable.
It is imposed on you by the reckless behavior of others, and you ave to just pay the price.
But the more India and, one hopes, soon akistan get enmeshed in global service supply chains, the greater disin entive they have to fight anything but a border skirmish or a war of words.
he example of the 2002 India-Pakistan nuclear crisis at least gives us HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION ome hope.
That cease-fire was brought to us not by General Powell but y General Electric.
e bring good things to life.
NFOSYS VERSUS L-QAEDA fortunately, even G E can do only so much.
Because, alas, a new _y source for geopolitical instability has emerged only in recent years, or which even the updated Dell Theory can provide no restraint.
It is he emergence of mutant global supply chainsthat is, nonstate actors, e they criminals or terrorists, who learn to use all the elements of the flat orld to advance a highly destabilizing, even nihilistic agenda.
I first tarted thinking about this when Nandan Nilekani, the Infosys C E O , as giving me that tour I referred to in Chapter 1 of his company's global ideoconferencing center at its Bangalore headquarters.
As Nandan ex lained to me how Infosys could get its global supply chain together at nce for a virtual conference in that room, a thought popped into my ead: Who else uses uploading and supply-chaining so imaginatively?
he answer, of course, is al-Qaeda.
l-Qaeda has learned to use many of the same instruments for global ollaboration that Infosys uses, but instead of producing products and rofits with them, it has produced mayhem and murder.
This is a partic larly difficult problem.
In fact, it may be the most vexing geopolitical roblem for flat-world countries that want to focus on the future.
The flat orldunfortunatelyis a friend of both Infosys and al-Qaeda.
The Dell heory will not work at all against these informal Islamo-Leninist terror etworks, because they are not a state with a population that will hold its eaders accountable or with a domestic business lobby that might restrain hem.
These mutant global supply chains are formed for the purpose of estruction, not profit.
They don't need investors, only recruits, donors, nd victims.
Yet these mobile, self-financing mutant supply chains use all he tools of collaboration offered by the flat worlduploading to raise  H E W O R L D IS F L A T oney, to recruit followers, and to stimulate and disseminate ideas; out ourcing to train recruits; and supply-chaining to distribute the tools nd the suicide bombers to undertake operations.
The U.S. Central ommand has a name for this whole underground network: the Virtual aliphate.
And its leaders and innovators understand the flat world al ost as well as Wal-Mart, Dell, and Infosys do.
n Chapter 15,1 tried to explain that you cannot understand the rise of l-Qaeda emotionally and politically without reference to the flattening of he world.
What I am arguing here is that you cannot understand the rise f al-Qaeda technically without reference to the flattening of the world, ei her.
Globalization in general has been al-Qaeda's friend in that it has elped to solidify a revival of Muslim identity and solidarity, with Muslims n one country much better able to see and sympathize with the struggles f their brethren in another countrythanks to the Internet and satellite elevision.
At the same time, as I pointed out, this flattening process has in ensified the feelings of humiliation in some quarters of the Muslim world ver the fact that civilizations to which the Muslim world once felt supe iorHindus, Jews, Christians, Chineseare now all doing better than any Muslim countries, and everyone can see it.
The flattening of the orld has also led to more urbanization and large-scale immigration to the est of many of these young, unemployed, frustrated Arab-Muslim males, hile simultaneously making it much easier for informal networks of these oung men to form, operate, and interconnect.
This certainly has been a oon for underground extremist Muslim political groups.
There has been  proliferation of these informal mutual supply chains throughout the rab-Muslim world todaysmall networks of people who move money hrough hawalas (hand-to-hand financing networks), who recruit through lternative education systems like the madrassas, and who communicate hrough the Internet and other tools of the global information revolution.
hink about it: A century ago, anarchists were limited in their ability to ommunicate and collaborate with one another, to find sympathizers, and o band together for an operation.
Today, with the Internet, that is not a roblem.
Today even the Unabomber could find friends to join a consor ium where his "strengths" could be magnified and reinforced by others ho had just as warped a worldview as he did.
HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION hat we have witnessed in Iraq is an even more perverse mutation of his mutant supply chainthe suicide supply chain.
Since the start of the .S.
invasion in March 2003, hundreds of suicide bombers have been re ruited from within Iraq and from across the Muslim world, brought to he Iraqi front by some underground railroad, connected with the bomb akers there, and then dispatched against U.S. and Iraqi targets accord ng to whatever suits the daily tactical needs of the insurgent Islamist orces in Iraq.
I can understand, but not accept, the notion that more than hirty-seven years of Israeli occupation of the West Bank might have riven some Palestinians into a suicidal rage.
But the American occupa ion of Iraq was only a few months old before it started to get hit by this uicide supply chain.
How do you recruit so many young men "off the helf" who are ready to commit suicide in the cause of jihad, many of hem apparently not even Iraqis?
And they don't even identify themselves y name or want to get creditat least in this world.
The fact is that estern intelligence agencies seem to have little clue how this under round suicide supply chain works, and it has basically stymied the U.S. rmed forces in Iraq.
From what we do know, though, this Virtual aliphate works just like the supply chains I described earlier.
Just as you ake an item off the shelf in a discount store in Birmingham and another ne is immediately made in Beijing, so the retailers of suicide deploy a uman bomber in Baghdad and another one is immediately recruited nd indoctrinated in Beirut.
To the extent that this tactic spreads, it will re uire a major rethinking of U.S. military doctrine.
he flat world has also been such a huge boon for al-Qaeda and its ilk ecause of the way it enables the small to act big, and the way it enables mall actsthe killing of just a few peopleto have big effects.
The hor ific video of the beheading of Wall Street Journal reporter Danny Pearl by slamist militants in Pakistan was transmitted by the Internet all over the orld.
There is not a journalist anywhere who saw or even just read about hat who was not terrified.
But those same beheading videos are also used s tools of recruitment.
The flat world makes it much easier for terrorists o transmit their terror.
With the Internet they don't even have to go hrough Western or Arab news organizations but can broadcast right into our computer.
It takes much less dynamite to transmit so much more  H E W O R L D IS F L A T nxiety.
Just as the U.S. Army had embedded journalists, so the suicide upply chain has embedded terrorists, in their own way, to tell us their side f the story.
How many times have I gotten up in the morning, fired up he Internet, and been confronted by the video image of some masked unman threatening to behead an Americanall brought to me courtesy f AOL's home page?
The Internet is an enormously useful tool for the issemination of propaganda, conspiracy theories, and plain old untruths, ecause it combines a huge reach with a patina of technology that makes nything on the Internet somehow more believable.
The new system of diffusion the Internetis more likely to trans it irrationality than rationality," said political theorist Yaron Ezrahi, ho specializes in the interaction between media and politics.
"Because rrationality is more emotionally loaded, it requires less knowledge, it ex lains more to more people, it goes down easier."
That is why conspiracy heories are so rife in the Arab-Muslim world todayand unfortunately re becoming so in many quarters of the Western world, for that matter.
onspiracy theories are like a drug that goes right into your bloodstream, nabling you to see "the Light."
And the Internet is the needle.
Young eople used to have to take LSD to escape.
Now they just go online.
ow you don't shoot up, you download.
You download the precise point f view that speaks to all your own biases.
And the flat world makes it all o much easier.
n many cases, networks like al-Qaeda use the Internetnot only for asy, cheap, global command and control but, even more important, as a lobal megaphone to radiate ideas.
Indeed, some Islamist radical move ents have no real command and control and don't even pretend that hey do.
They simply disseminate their ideas globally, using the flat-world latform, and inspire and exhort people to use their own local capacity to ake initiativesto blow up a train in Spain or a subway in London.
here are no orders going from a single headquarters to the field, just in piration and maybe some training.
The locals do the rest on their own.
abriel Weimann, a professor of communications at Haifa Univer ity, Israel, did an incisive study of terrorists' use of the Internet, which as published in March 2004 by the United States Institute of Peace and HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T REVENTION xcerpted on YaleGlobal Online on April 26, 2004.
He made the follow ng points: hile the danger that cyber-terrorism poses to the Internet is fre uently debated, surprisingly little is known about the threat osed by terrorists' use of the Internet.
A recent six-year-long study hows that terrorist organizations and their supporters have been sing all of the tools that the Internet offers to recruit supporters, aise funds, and launch a worldwide campaign of fear.
It is also lear that to combat terrorism effectively, mere suppression of their nternet tools is not enough.
Our scan of the Internet in 2003-04 evealed the existence of hundreds of websites serving terrorists in ifferent, albeit sometimes overlapping, ways.
There are count ess examples of how [terrorists] use this uncensored medium to pread disinformation, to deliver threats intended to instill fear and elplessness, and to disseminate horrific images of recent actions.
ince September 11, 2001, al-Qaeda has festooned its websites ith a string of announcements of an impending "large attack" on S targets.
These warnings have received considerable media overage, which has helped to generate a widespread sense of read and insecurity among audiences throughout the world and specially within the United States.
he Internet has significantly expanded the opportunities for errorists to secure publicity.
Until the advent of the Internet, ter orists' hopes of winning publicity for their causes and activities de ended on attracting the attention of television, radio, or the print edia.
The fact that terrorists themselves have direct control over he content of their websites offers further opportunities to shape ow they are perceived by different target audiences and to ma ipulate their image and the images of their enemies.
Most terror st sites do not celebrate their violent activities.
Insteadregardless f their nature, motives, or locationmost terrorist sites empha ize two issues: the restrictions placed on freedom of expression; nd the plight of their comrades who are now political prisoners.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T hese issues resonate powerfully with their own supporters and are lso calculated to elicit sympathy from Western audiences that herish freedom of expression and frown on measures to silence olitical opposition .
errorists have proven not only skillful at online marketing but lso adept at mining the data offered by the billion-some pages of he World Wide Web.
They can learn from the Internet about the chedules and locations of targets such as transportation facilities, uclear power plants, public buildings, airports and ports, and even ounterterrorism measures.
According to Secretary of Defense onald Rumsfeld, an al-Qaeda training manual recovered in fghanistan tells its readers, "Using public sources openly and ithout resorting to illegal means, it is possible to gather at least 0 percent of all information required about the enemy."
One aptured al-Qaeda computer contained engineering and struc ural architecture features of a dam, which had been downloaded rom the Internet and which would enable al-Qaeda engineers nd planners to simulate catastrophic failures.
In other captured omputers, U.S. investigators found evidence that al-Qaeda oper tors spent time on sites that offer software and programming nstructions for the digital switches that run power, water, trans ortation, and communications grids.
ike many other political organizations, terrorist groups use he Internet to raise funds.
Al-Qaeda, for instance, has always de ended heavily on donations, and its global fundraising network s built upon a foundation of charities, nongovernmental organi ations, and other financial institutions that use websites and nternet-based chat rooms and forums.
The fighters in the Rus ian breakaway republic of Chechnya have likewise used the nternet to publicize the numbers of bank accounts to which sym athizers can contribute.
And in December 2001, the U.S. gov rnment seized the assets of a Texas-based charity because of its ies to Hamas.
n addition to soliciting financial aid online, terrorists recruit onverts by using the full panoply of website technologies (audio, HE DELL THEORY OF C O N F L I C T PREVENTION igital video, etc.)
to enhance the presentation of their message.
nd like commercial sites that track visitors to develop consumer rofiles, terrorist organizations capture information about the sers who browse their websites.
Visitors who seem most inter sted in the organization's cause or well suited to carrying out its ork are then contacted.
Recruiters may also use more interactive nternet technology to roam online chat rooms and cyber cafes, ooking for receptive members of the public, particularly young eople.
The SITE Institute, a Washington, D.C.-based terrorism esearch group that monitors al-Qaeda's Internet communications, as provided chilling details of a high-tech recruitment drive aunched in 2003 to recruit fighters to travel to Iraq and attack U.S. nd coalition forces there.
The Internet also grants terrorists a heap and efficient means of networking.
Many terrorist groups, mong them Hamas and al-Qaeda, have undergone a transforma ion from strictly hierarchical organizations with designated lead rs to affiliations of semi-independent cells that have no single ommanding hierarchy.
Through the Internet, these loosely inter onnected groups are able to maintain contact with one an therand with members of other terrorist groups.
The Internet onnects not only members of the same terrorist organizations ut also members of different groups.
For instance, dozens of ites supporting terrorism in the name of jihad permit terrorists n places as far removed from one another as Chechnya and alaysia to exchange ideas and practical information about how o build bombs, establish terror cells, and carry out attacks .
l-Qaeda operatives relied heavily on the Internet in planning nd coordinating the September 11 attacks.
or all of these reasons we are just at the beginning of understanding he geopolitical impact of the flattening of the world.
On the one hand, ailed states and failed regions are places we have every incentive to avoid oday.
They offer no economic opportunity and there is no Soviet Union ut there competing with us for influence over such countries.
On the ther hand, there may be nothing more dangerous today than a failed  H E W O R L D IS F L A T tate with broadband capability.
That is, even failed states tend to have elecommunications systems and satellite links, and therefore if a terror st group infiltrates a failed state, as al-Qaeda did with Afghanistan, it can mplify its power enormously.
As much as big powers want to stay away rom such states, they may feel compelled to get even more deeply em roiled in them.
Think of America in Afghanistan and Iraq, Russia in hechnya, Australia in East Timor.
n the flat world it is much more difficult to hide, but much easier to et connected.
"Think of Mao at the beginning of the Chinese Commu ist revolution," remarked Michael Mandelbaum, the Johns Hopkins oreign policy specialist.
"The Chinese Communists had to hide in caves n northwest China, but they could move around in whatever territory hey were able to control.
Bin Laden, by contrast, can't show his face, but e can reach every household in the world, thanks to the Internet."
Bin aden cannot capture any territory, but he can capture the imagination f millions of people.
And he has, broadcasting right into American liv ng rooms on the eve of the 2004 presidential election.
ell hath no fury like a terrorist with a satellite dish and an interac ive Web site.
oo ERSONALLY NSECURE   the fall of 2004,1 was invited to speak at a synagogue in Woodstock, ew York, not far from Yasgur's farm, home of the famous Woodstock usic festival.
I asked my hosts how was it that they were able to get a syn gogue in Woodstock, of all places, big enough to support a lecture se ies.
Very simple, they said.
Since 9/11, Jews, and others, have been oving from New York City to places like Woodstock, to get away from hat they fear will be the next ground zero.
Right now this trend is a rickle, but it would become a torrent if a nuclear device were detonated n any European or American city.
ince this threat is the mother of all unflatteners, this book would not e complete without a discussion of it.
We can live with a lot.
We lived HE D E L L THEORY OF C O N F L I C T P R E V E N T I O N hrough 9/11.
But we cannot live with nuclear terrorism.
That would unflatten the world permanently.
he only reason that Osama bin Laden did not use a nuclear device n 9/11 was not that he did not have the intention but that he did not ave the capability.
And since the Dell Theory offers no hope of re training the suicide supply chains, the only strategy we have is to limit heir worst capabilities.
That means a much more serious global effort to tanch nuclear proliferation by limiting the supplyto buy up the fissile aterial that is already out there, particularly in the former Soviet nion, and prevent more states from going nuclear.
Harvard University nternational affairs expert Graham Allison, in his book Nuclear Terrorism: he Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe, oudines just such a strategy for enying terrorists access to nuclear weapons and nuclear materials.
It an be done, he insists.
It is a challenge to our will and convictions, but ot to our capabilities.
Allison proposes a new American-led interna ional security order to deal with this problem based on what he calls "a octrine of the Three No's: No loose nukes, No new nascent nukes, and o new nuclear states."
No loose nukes, says Allison, means locking own all nuclear weapons and all nuclear material from which bombs ould be made in a much more serious way than we have done up till ow.
"We don't lose gold from Fort Knox," says Allison.
"Russia doesn't ose treasures from the Kremlin armory.
So we both know how to prevent heft of those things that are super valuable to us if we are determined to o it."
No new nascent nukes means recognizing that there is a group of ctors out there who can and do produce highly enriched uranium or lutonium, which is nothing more than nuclear bombs just about to atch.
We need a much more credible, multilateral nonproliferation egime that soaks up this fissile material.
Finally, no new nuclear states eans "drawing a line under the current eight nuclear powers and de ermining that, however unfair and unreasonable it may be, that club ill have no more members than those eight," says Allison, adding that hese three steps might then buy us time to develop a more formal, sus ainable, internationally approved regime.
t would be nice also to be able to deny the Internet to al-Qaeda and ts ilk, but that, alas, is impossiblewithout undermining ourselves.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T hat is why limiting their capabilities is necessary but not sufficient.
We lso have to find a way to get at their worst intentions.
If we are not going o shut down the Internet and all the other creative and collaborative ools that have flattened the world, and if we can't restrict access to them, he only thing we can do is try to influence the imagination and inten ions that people bring to them and draw from them.
When I raised this ssue, and the broad themes of this book, with my religious teacher, abbi Tzvi Marx from Holland, he surprised me by saying that the flat orld I was describing reminded him of the story of the Tower of Babel.
ow so?
I asked.
"The reason God banished all the people from the ower of Babel and made them all speak different languages was not be ause he did not want them to collaborate per se," answered Rabbi Marx.
It was because he was enraged at what they were collaborating onan ffort to build a tower to the heavens so they could become God."
This as a distortion of the human capacity, so God broke their union and heir ability to communicate with one another.
Now, all these years later, umankind has again created a new platform for more people from ore places to communicate and collaborate with less friction and more ase than ever: the Internet.
Would God see the Internet as heresy?
Absolutely not," said Marx.
"The heresy is not that mankind works to ether it is to what ends.
It is essential that we use this new ability to com unicate and collaborate for the right endsfor constructive human aims nd not megalomaniacal ends.
Building a tower was megalomaniacal.
Bin aden's insistence that he has the truth and can flatten anyone else's tower ho doesn't heed him is megalomaniacal.
Collaborating so mankind can chieve its full potential is God's hope."
ow we promote more of that kind of collaboration is what the final hapter is all about.
onclusion: magination EVENTEEN 1/9 Versus 9/11 magination is more important than knowledge.
Albert Einstein  flecting on this past decade and a half, during which the world ent flat, it strikes me that our lives have been powerfully shaped y two dates: 11/9 and 9/11.
These two dates represent the two ompeting forms of imagination at work in the world today: the creative magination of 11/9 and the destructive imagination of 9/11.
One brought own a wall and opened the windows of the worldboth the operating ystem and the kind we look through.
It unlocked half the planet and ade the citizens there our collaborators and competitors.
Another rought down the World Trade Center, closing its Windows on the orld restaurant forever and putting up new invisible and concrete walls mong people at a time when we thought 11/9 had erased them for good.
he dismantling of the Berlin Wall on 11/9 was brought about by eople who dared to imagine a different, more open world one where very human being would be free to realize his or her full potential  nd who then summoned the courage to act on that imagination.
Do ou remember how it happened?
It was so simple, really: In July 1989, undreds of East Germans sought refuge at the West German embassy n Hungary.
In September 1989, Hungary decided to remove its border estrictions with Austria.
That meant that any East German who got into ungary could pass through to Austria and the free world.
Sure enough,  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ore than thirteen thousand East Germans escaped through Hungary's ack door.
Pressure built up on the East German government.
When in ovember it announced plans to ease travel restrictions, tens of thou ands of East Germans converged on the Berlin Wall, where, on 11/9/89, order guards just opened the gates.
omeone there in Hungary, maybe it was the prime minister, maybe it as just a bureaucrat, must have said to himself or herself, "Imagine magine what might happen if we opened the border with Austria."
magine if the Soviet Union were frozen in place.
Imagine if East German itizens, young and old, men and women, were so emboldened by seeing heir neighbors flee to the West that one day they just swarmed that Berlin all and started to tear it down.
Some people must have had a conversa ion just like that, and because they did, millions of Eastern Europeans ere able to walk out from behind the Iron Curtain and engage with a flat ening world.
It was a great era in which to be an American.
We were the nly superpower, and the world was our oyster.
There were no walls.
oung Americans could think about traveling, for a semester or a summer, o more countries than any American generation before them.
Indeed, hey could travel as far as their imaginations and wallets could take them.
hey could also look around at their classmates and see people from more ifferent countries and cultures than any other class before them.
ine-eleven, of course, changed all that.
It showed us the power of a ery different kind of imagination.
It showed us the power of a group of ateful men who spent several years imagining how to kill as many in ocent people as they could.
At some point bin Laden and his gang lit rally must have looked at one another and said, "Imagine if we actually ould hit both towers of the World Trade Center at the exact right spot, etween the ninety-fourth and ninety-eighth floors.
And imagine if each ower were to come crashing down like a house of cards."
Yes, I am sorry o say, some people had that conversation, too.
And, as a result, the world hat was our oyster seemed to close up like a shell.
here has never been a time in history when human imagination asn't important, but writing this book tells me that it has never been ore important than now, because in a flat world so many of the tools of ollaboration are becoming commodities available to everyone.
So many 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 ore individuals now have the power to create their own content nd globalize it.
There is one thing, though, that has not and can never e commoditized, and that is imaginationwhat content we dream of reating.
hen we lived in a more centralized, and more vertically organized, orldwhere states had a near total monopoly of powerindividual magination was a big problem when the leader of a superpower state   Stalin, a Mao, or a Hitlerbecame warped.
But today, when individu ls can easily access all the tools of collaboration and superempower hemselves, or their small cells, individuals do not need to control a ountry to threaten large numbers of other people.
The small can act ery big today and pose a serious danger to world orderwithout the in truments of a state.
herefore, thinking about how we stimulate positive imaginations is f the utmost importance.
As Irving Wladawsky-Berger, the IBM com uter scientist, put it to me: We need to think more seriously than ever bout how we encourage people to focus on productive outcomes that dvance and unite civilizationpeaceful imaginations that seek to minimize alienation and celebrate interdependence rather than selfsufficiency, inclusion rather than exclusion," openness, opportunity, and ope rather than limits, suspicion, and grievance.
et me try to illustrate this by example.
In early 1999, two men started irlines from scratch, just a few weeks apart.
Both men had a dream in olving airplanes and the savvy to do something about it.
One was David eeleman.
In February 1999, he started JetBlue.
He assembled $130 illion in venture capital, bought a fleet of Airbus A-320 passenger jets, ecruited pilots and signed them to seven-year contracts, and outsourced is reservation system to stay-at-home moms and retirees living around alt Lake City, Utah, who booked passengers on their home computers.
he other person who started an airline was, as we now know from he 9/11 Commission Report, Osama bin Laden.
At a meeting in andahar, Afghanistan, in March or April 1999, he accepted a proposal nitially drawn up by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the Pakistan-born me hanical engineer who was the architect of the 9/11 plot.
JetBlue's motto as "Same Altitude.
Different Attitude."
Al-Qaeda's motto was "Allahu  H E W O R L D IS F L A T kbar," God is great.
Both airlines were designed to fly into New York ityNeeleman's into JFK and bin Laden's into lower Manhattan.
aybe it was because I read the 9/11 report while on a trip to Silicon alley that I could not help but notice how much Khalid Sheikh ohammed spoke and presented himself as just another eager engineerentrepreneur, with his degree from North Carolina Agricultural and echnical State University, pitching his ideas to Osama bin Laden, who omes off as just another wealthy venture capitalist.
But Mohammed, las, was looking for adventure capital.
As the 9/11 Commission Report ut it, "No one exemplifies the model of the terrorist entrepreneur more learly than Khalid Sheikh Mohammed (KSM), the principal architect f the 9/11 attacks.
Highly educated and equally comfortable in a overnment office or a terrorist safe house, KSM applied his imagina ion, technical aptitude and managerial skills to hatching and planning n extraordinary array of terrorist schemes.
These ideas included con entional car bombing, political assassination, aircraft bombing, hijack ng, reservoir poisoning, and, ultimately, the use of aircraft as missiles uided by suicide operatives... KSM presents himself as an entrepre eur seeking venture capital and people .
Bin Laden summoned SM to Kandahar in March or April 1999 to tell him that al-Qaeda ould support his proposal.
The plot was now referred to within alQaeda as the 'planes operation.'
" rom his corporate headquarters in Afghanistan, bin Laden proved to e a very deft supply chain manager.
He assembled a virtual company ust for this projectexactly like any global conglomerate would do in he flat worldfinding just the right specialist for each task.
He out ourced the overall design and blueprint for 9/11 to KSM and overall fi ancial management to KSM's nephew, Ali Abdul Aziz Ali, who oordinated the dispersal of funds to the hijackers through wire transfers, ash, traveler's checks, and credit and debit cards from overseas bank ac ounts.
Bin Laden recruited from the al-Qaeda roster just the right mus le guys from Asir Province, in Saudi Arabia, just the right pilots from urope, just the right team leader from Hamburg, and just the right sup ort staff from Pakistan.
He outsourced the pilot training to flight schools n America.
Bin Laden, who knew he needed only to "lease" the Boeing 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 57s, 767s, A320s, and possibly 747s for his operation, raised the neces ary capital for training pilots on all these different aircraft from a syndi ate of pro-al-Qaeda Islamic charities and other Muslim adventure apitalists ready to fund anti-American operations.
In the case of 9/11, he total budget was around $400,000.
Once the team was assembled, in Laden focused on his own core competencyoverall leadership and deological inspiration of his suicide supply chain, with assistance from is deputies Mohammed Atef and Ayman al-Zawahiri.
ou can get the full flavor of the bin Laden supply chain, and what an ggressive adopter of new technology al-Qaeda was, by reading just one ntry from the December 2001 U.S. District Court for the Eastern istrict of Virginia's official indictment of Zacarias Moussaoui, the socalled nineteenth hijacker from 9/11.
It reported the following: "In or bout June 1999, in an interview with an Arabic-language television sta ion, Osama bin Laden issued a .
threat indicating that all American ales should be killed."
It then points out that throughout the year 2000, ll of the hijackers, including Moussaoui, began either attending or in uiring about flight school courses in America: "On or about September 9, 2000, Zacarias Moussaoui contacted Airman Flight School in orman, Oklahoma, using an e-mail account he set up on September 6 ith an Internet service provider in Malaysia.
In or about October 2000, acarias Moussaoui received letters from Infocus Tech, a Malaysian com any, stating that Moussaoui was appointed Infocus Tech's marketing onsultant in the United States, the United Kingdom and Europe, and hat he would receive, among other things, an allowance of $2,500 per onth .
On or about December 11,2000, Mohammed Atta purchased light deck videos for the Boeing 767 Model 300ER and the Airbus A320 odel 200 from the Ohio Pilot S t o r e .
In or about June 2001, in orman, Oklahoma, Zacarias Moussaoui made inquiries about starting a ropdusting company... On or about August 16, 2001, Zacarias oussaoui possessed, among other things: two knives; a pair of binocu ars; flight manuals for the Boeing 747 Model 400; a flight simulator com uter program; fighting gloves and shin guards; a piece of paper referring o a handheld Global Positioning System receiver and a camcorder; soft are that could be used to review pilot procedures for the Boeing 747  H E W O R L D IS F L A T odel 400; letters indicating that Moussaoui is a marketing consultant in he United States for Infocus Tech; a computer disk containing informa ion related to the aerial application of pesticides; and a hand-held avia ion radio."
devout Mormon who grew up in Latin America where his father as a UPI correspondent, David Neeleman, by contrast, is one of those lassic American entrepreneurs and a man of enormous integrity.
He ever went to college, but he has started two successful airlines, Morris ir and JetBlue, and played an important role in shaping a third, outhwest.
He is the godfather of ticketless air travel, now known as -ticketing.
"I am a total optimist.
I think my father is an optimist," he aid to me, trying to explain where his innovative genes came from.
"I rew up in a very happy home .
JetBlue was created in my own mind efore it was created on paper."
Using his optimistic imagination and his bility also to quickly adopt all the latest technology because he had no egacy system to worry about, Neeleman started a highly profitable air ine, creating jobs, low-cost travel, a unique onboard, satellite-supported ntertainment system, and one of the most people-friendly places to ork you can imagine.
He also started a catastrophe relief fund in his ompany to help employee families who are faced with a sudden death r catastrophic illness of a loved one.
Neeleman (who is now chairman f the board) donates $1 of his salary for every $1 any employee puts in he fund.
"I think it is important that people give a little," said Neeleman.
I believe that there are irrevocable laws of heaven that when you serve thers you get this little buzz."
In 2003, Neeleman, already a wealthy an from his JetBlue stock, donated about $120,000 of his $200,000 alary to the JetBlue employee catastrophe fund.
n the waiting room outside his New York City office, there is a color hoto of a JetBlue Airbus flying over the World Trade Center.
Neeleman as in his office on 9/11 and watched the Twin Towers burn, while his wn JetBlue airliners were circling JFK in a holding pattern.
When I ex lained to him the comparison/contrast I was going to make between im and bin Laden, he was both uncomfortable and curious.
As I closed p my computer and prepared to leave following our interview, he said 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 e had one question for me: "Do you think Osama actually believes here is a God up there who is happy with what he is doing?"
told him I just didn't know.
What I do know is this: There are two ays to flatten the world.
One is to use your imagination to bring veryone up to the same level, and the other is to use your imagination o bring everyone down to the same level.
David Neeleman used his op imistic imagination and the easily available technologies of the flat orld to lift people up.
He launched a surprising and successful new air ine, some profits of which he turns over to a catastrophe relief fund for is employees.
Osama bin Laden and his disciples used their twisted magination, and many of the same tools, to launch a surprise attack, hich brought two enormous symbols of American power down to their evel.
Worse, they raised their money and created this massive human atastrophe under the guise of religion.
From the primordial swamps of globalization have emerged two ge etic variants," observed Infosys C E O Nandan Nilekanione is alQaeda and the other are companies like Infosys or JetBlue.
"Our focus herefore has to be how we can encourage more of the good mutations nd keep out the bad."
could not agree more.
Indeed, that effort may be the most impor ant thing we learn to do in order to keep this planet in one piece.
ave no doubt that advances in technologyfrom iris scans to X-ray achines will help us to identify, expose, and capture those who are rying to use the easily available tools of the flat world to destroy it.
But in he end, technology alone cannot keep us safe.
We really do have to find ays to affect the imagination of those who would use the tools of col aboration to destroy the world that has invented those tools.
But how oes one go about nurturing a more hopeful, life-affirming, and tolerant magination in others?
Everyone has to ask himself or herself this ques ion.
I ask it as an American.
I stress this last point because I think it starts irst and foremost by America's setting an example.
Those of us who are ortunate to live in free and progressive societies have to set an example.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T e have to be the best global citizens we can be.
We cannot retreat from he world.
We have to make sure that we get the best of our own imagi ationsand never let our imaginations get the best of us.
t is always hard to know when we have crossed the line between jus ified safety measures and letting our imaginations get the best of us and hereby paralyzing ourselves with precautions.
I argued right after 9/11 hat the reason our intelligence did not pick up the 9/11 plotters was "a ailure of imagination."
We just did not have enough people within our ntelligence community with a sick enough imagination to match that of in Laden and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed.
We do need some people ike that within our intelligence services.
But we all don't need to go own that route.
We all don't need to become so gripped by imagining he worst in everyone around us that we shrink into ourselves.
n 2003, my older daughter, Orly, was in her high school's symphonic rchestra.
They spent all year practicing to take part in the national high chool orchestra competition in New Orleans that March.
When March olled around, it appeared that we were heading for war in Iraq, so the ontgomery County School Board canceled all out-of-town trips by chool groups including the orchestra's attendance at New Orleans  earing an outbreak of terrorism.
I thought this was absolutely nuts.
Even he evil imagination of 9/11 has its limits.
At some point you do have to sk yourself whether Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri were eally sitting around a cave in Afghanistan, with Ayman saying to Osama, Say, Osama, d'you remember that annual high school orchestra com etition in New Orleans?
Well, it's coming up again next week.
Let's eally make a splash and go after it."
o, I don't think so.
Let's leave the cave dwelling to bin Laden.
We ave to be the masters of our imaginations, not the prisoners.
I had a riend in Beirut who used to joke that every time she flew on an airplane he packed a bomb in her suitcase, because the odds of two people car ying a bomb on the same plane were so much higher.
Do whatever it akes, but get out the door.
propos of that, let me share the 9/11 story that touched me most rom The New York Times series "Portraits of Grief," the little biographies f those who were killed.
It was the story of Candace Lee Williams, the  1 / 9 V E R S U S 9/1 1 wenty-year-old business student at Northeastern University, who had orked from January to June of 2001 as a work-study intern at the Merrill ynch office on the fourteenth floor of 1 World Trade Center.
Both andace's mother and colleagues described her to The New York Times s a young woman full of energy and ambition, who loved her intern hip.
Indeed, Candace's colleagues at Merrill Lynch liked her so much hey took her to dinner on her last day of work, sent her home in a lim usine, and later wrote Northeastern to say, "Send us five more like andace."
A few weeks after finishing midterm examsshe was on a une-December academic scheduleCandace Lee Williams decided o meet her roommate at her home in California.
Candace had recently ade the dean's list.
"They'd rented a convertible preparing for the oc asion, and Candace wanted her picture taken with that Hollywood ign," her mother, Sherri, told the Times.
nfortunately, Candace took the American Airlines Flight 11 that de arted from Boston's Logan Airport on the morning of September 11, 001, at 8:02 a.m.
The plane was hijacked at 8:14 a.m. by five men, in luding Mohammed Atta, who was in seat 8D.
With Atta at the controls, he Boeing 767-223ER was diverted to Manhattan and slammed Candace ee Williams right back into the very same World Trade Center towerbetween floors 94 and 98where she had worked as an intern.
irline records show that she was seated next to an eighty-year-old randmothertwo people at opposites ends of life: one full of memo ies, one full of dreams.
hat does this story say to me?
It says this: When Candace Lee illiams boarded Flight 11 she could not have imagined how it would nd.
But in the wake of 9/11, none of us can now board an airplane with ut imagining how it could endthat what happened to Candace Lee illiams could also happen to us.
We all are now so much more conscious hat a person's life can be wiped out by the arbitrary will of a madman in a ave in Afghanistan.
But the fact is, the chances of our plane being hi acked by terrorists today are still infinitesimal.
We are more likely to be illed hitting a deer with our car or being struck by lightning.
So even hough we can now imagine what could happen when we get on an air lane, we have to get on the plane anyway.
Because the alternative to not  H E W O R L D IS F L A T etting on that plane is putting ourselves in our own cave.
Imagination an't just be about reruns.
It also has to be about writing our own new cript.
From what I read about Candace Lee Williams, she was an optimist.
I'd bet anything she'd still be getting on planes today if she had the hance.
And so must we all.
merica's role in the world, from its inception, has been to be the ountry that looks forward, not back.
One of the most dangerous things hat has happened to America since 9/11, under the Bush administration, is that we have gone from exporting hope to exporting fear.
We have one from trying to coax the best out of the world to snarling at it way too ften.
And when you export fear, you end up importing everyone else's ears.
Yes, we need people who can imagine the worst, because the worst id happen on 9/11 and it could happen again.
But, as I said, there is a ine line between precaution and paranoia, and at times we have crossed t. Europeans and others often love to make fun of American optimism nd navet our crazy notion that every problem has a solution, that tomorrow can be better than yesterday, that the future can always bury the ast.
But I have always believed that deep down the rest of the world envies that American optimism and navet.
It needs American optimism.
t is one of the things that help keep the world spinning on its axis.
If we o dark as a society, if we stop being the world's "dream factory," we will ake the world not only a darker place but also a poorer place.
alysts have always tended to measure a society by classical economic and social statistics: its deficit-to-GDP ratio, or its unemployment rate, or the rate of literacy among its adult women.
Such statistics re important and revealing.
But there is another statistic, much harder to easure, that I think is even more important and revealing: Does your society have more memories than dreams or more dreams than memories?
y dreams I mean the positive, life-affirming variety.
The business organization consultant Michael Hammer once remarked, "One thing hat tells me a company is in trouble is when they tell me how good they ere in the past.
Same with countries.
You don't want to forget your dentity.
I am glad you were great in the fourteenth century, but that was 1/9 V E R S U S 9/1 1 hen and this is now.
When memories exceed dreams, the end is near.
he hallmark of a truly successful organization is the willingness to aban on what made it successful and start fresh."
n societies that have more memories than dreams, too many people re spending too many days looking backward.
They see dignity, affirma ion, and self-worth not by mining the present but by chewing on the ast.
And even that is usually not a real past but an imagined and dorned past.
Indeed, such societies focus all their imagination on mak ng that imagined past even more beautiful than it ever was, and then hey cling to it like a rosary or a strand of worry beads, rather than imag ning a better future and acting on that.
It is dangerous enough when ther countries go down that route; it would be disastrous for America to ose its bearings and move in that direction.
I think my friend David othkopf, a former Commerce Department official and now a fellow t the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said it best: "The nswer for us lies not in what has changed, but in recognizing what has ot changed.
Because only through this recognition will we begin to fo us on the truly critical issuesan effective multilateral response to eapons of mass destruction proliferation, the creation of real stakehold rs in globalization among the world's poor, the need for reform in the rab world, and a style of U.S. leadership that seeks to build our base of upport worldwide by getting more people to voluntarily sign onto our alues.
We need to remember that those values are the real foundation or our security and the real source of our strength.
And we need to rec gnize that our enemies can never defeat us.
Only we can defeat our elves, by throwing out the rule book that has worked for us for a long, ong time."
believe that history will make very clear that President Bush shame essly exploited the emotions around 9/11 for political purposes.
He used hose 9/11 emotions to take a far-right Republican domestic agenda on axes, the environment, and social issues from 9/10an agenda for hich he had no popular mandateand drive it into a 9/12 world.
In do ng so, Mr. Bush not only drove a wedge between Americans, and be ween Americans and the world, he drove a wedge between America and ts own history and identity.
His administration transformed the United  H E W O R L D IS F L A T tates into "the United States of Fighting Terrorism."
This is the real reason, in my view, that so many people in the world dislike President Bush o intensely.
They feel that he has taken away something very dear to heman America that exports hope, not fear.
e need our president to restore September 11 to its rightful place on he calendaras the day after September 10 and before September 12. e must never let it become a day that defines us.
Because ultimately eptember 11 is about them  the bad guys not about us.
e're about the Fourth of July.
We're about 11/9.
yond trying to retain the best of our own imaginations, what else an we do as Americans and as a global society to try to nurture the ame in others?
One has to approach this question with great humility.
hat leads one person to the joy of destruction and what leads another o the joy of creation, what leads one to imagine 11/9 and another to magine 9/11, is surely one of the great mysteries of contemporary life.
oreover, while most of us might have some clue about how to nurture  more positive imagination for our own kids, and maybe maybe for ur fellow citizens, it is presumptuous to think that we can do it for others, particularly those of a different culture, speaking different languages, nd living half a world away.
Yet 9/11, the flattening of the world, and the ontinuing threat of world-disrupting terrorism suggest that not thinking bout this is its own kind of dangerous navet.
So I insist on trying to do o, but I approach this issue with a keen awareness of the limits of what ny outsider can know or do.
enerally speaking, imagination is the product of two shaping forces.
ne is the narratives that people are nurtured onthe stories and myths hey and their religious and national leaders tell themselvesand how hose narratives feed their imaginations one way or another.
The other is he context in which people grow up, which has a huge impact on shaping how they see the world and others.
Outsiders cannot get inside and djust the Mexican or Arab or Chinese narrative any more than they can et inside the American one.
Only they can reinterpret their narrative, ake it more tolerant or forward looking, and adapt it to modernity.
No 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 ne can do that for them or even with them.
But one can think about ow to collaborate with others to change their contextthe context ithin which people grow up and live their daily livesto help nurture ore people with the imagination of 11/9 than 9/11.
et me offer a few examples.
BAY g Whitman, the C E O of eBay, once told me a wonderful story  V J - t h a t went like this: "We took eBay public in September 1998, in he middle of the dot-com boom.
And in September and October our tock would go up eighty points and down fifty in a single day.
I thought, This is insane.'
Anyway, one day I am minding my own business, sitting n my own cubicle, and my secretary runs over and says to me, 'Meg, it's rthur Levitt [chairman] of the SEC on the phone.'"
The Securities and xchange Commission oversees the stock market and is always con erned about issues of volatility in a stock and whether there is manipu ation behind it.
In those days, for a C E O to hear that "Arthur Levitt is on he line" was not a good way to start the day.
So I called my general counsel," said Whitman, "who came over from is cubicle, and he was white like a sheet.
We called Levitt back together nd we put him on the speakerphone, and I said, 'Hi, it's Meg Whitman of Bay.'
And he said, 'Hi, it's Arthur Levitt of the SEC.
I don't know you and ave never met you but I know that you just went public and I want to now: How did it go?
Were we [the SEC] customer-friendly?'
And so we reathed a sigh of relief, and we talked about that a little bit.
And then Levitt] said, 'Well, actually, another reason that I am calling is that I just ot my tenth positive feedback on eBay and have earned my yellow star.
nd I am so proud.'
And then he said, 'I am actually a collector of epression-era glass, post-1929, and so I have bought and sold on eBay nd you get feedback as a buyer and seller.
And I thought you would just ike to know.'
" very eBay user has a feedback profile made up of comments from  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ther eBay users who have done transactions with him or her, relating to hether the goods bought or sold were as expected and the transaction ent off smoothly.
This constitutes your official "eBay reputation."
You et +1 point for each positive comment, 0 points for each neutral com ent, and -1 for each negative comment.
A colored star icon is attached o your user ID on eBay for ten or more feedback points.
My user ID on Bay might be T O M F (50) and a blue star, which means that I have re eived positive feedback comments from fifty other eBay users.
Next to hat is a box that will tell you whether the seller has had 100 percent pos tive feedback comments or less, and also give you the chance to click nd read all the buyers' comments about that seller.
he point, said Whitman, is that "I think every human being, Arthur evitt or the janitor or the waitress or the doctor or the professor, needs nd craves validation and positive feedback."
And the big misconception s to think that it has to be money.
"It can be really small things," said hitman, "telling someone, 'You did a really great job, you were recog ized as doing a great history paper.'
Our users say to us [about eBay's star ystem], 'Where else can you wake up in the morning and see how much eople like you?'"
ut what is so striking, said Whitman, is that the overwhelming ma ority of feedback on eBay is positive.
That's interesting.
People don't sually write Wal-Mart managers to compliment them on a fabulous urchase.
But when you are part of a community that you feel ownership n, it is different.
You have a stake.
"The highest number of feedback we ave is well over 250,000 positive comments, and you can see each one," aid Whitman.
"You can see the entire history of each buyer and seller, nd we have introduced the ability to rebut.
You cannot be anony ous on eBay.
If you are not willing to say who you are, you should not e saying it.
And it became the norm of the community really fast.
We re not running an exchangewe are running a community."
Indeed, ith 105 million registered users from 190 countries trading more than 35 billion in products annually, eBay is actually a self-governing nationstatethe V.R.e., the Virtual Republic of eBay.
nd how is it governed?
The philosophy of eBay, said Whitman, is Let's make a small number of rules, really enforce them, and then create 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 n environment in which people can fulfill their own potential.
There is omething going on here besides buying and selling goods."
Even allow ng for corporate boosterism, Whitman's essential message is really worth ontemplating: "People will say that 'eBay restored my faith in human ty'contrary to the world where people are cheating and don't give eople the benefit of the doubt.
I hear that twice a week .
eBay offers he little guy, who's disenfranchised, an opportunity to compete on a to ally level playing field.
We have a disproportionate share of wheelchairs nd disabled and minorities, [because] on eBay people don't know who ou are.
You are only as good as your product and feedback."
hitman recalled that one day she got an e-mail from a couple in rlando who were coming to an "eBay Live" event at which she was peaking.
These are big revival meeting-conventions of eBay sellers.
hey asked if they could come backstage to meet Whitman after her peech.
"So after the keynote," she recalled, "they come back to my reen room, and in comes mom and dad and a seventeen-year-old boy in  wheelchairvery disabled with cerebral palsy.
They tell me, 'Kyle is ery disabled and can't go to school, [but] he built an eBay business and ast year my husband and I quit our jobs, and now we help himwe ave made more money on eBay than we ever made on our jobs.'
And hen they added the most incredible thing.
They said, 'On eBay, Kyle is ot disabled.'"
hitman told me that at another "eBay Live" event a young man ame up to her, a big power seller on eBay, and said that thanks to his Bay business he had been able to buy a house and a car, hire people, nd be his own boss.
But the best part, said Whitman, was that the young an added, "I am so excited about eBay, because I did not graduate from ollege and was sort of disowned by my family, and I am now the hit of y family.
I am a successful entrepreneur."
It's this blend of economic opportunity and validation" that makes Bay tick, concluded Whitman.
Those validated become transparent s good partners, because bad validation is an option for the whole ommunity.
ottom line: eBay didn't just create an online market.
It created a elf-governing communitya contextwhere anyone, from the severely  H E W O R L D IS F L A T andicapped to the head of the SEC, could come and achieve his or her otential and be validated as a good and trustworthy person by the whole ommunity.
That kind of self-esteem and validation is the best, most ef ective way of producing dehumiliation and redignification.
To the ex ent that America can collaborate with regions like the Arab-Muslim orld to produce contexts where young people can succeed, can achieve heir full potential on a level playing field, can get validation and respect rom achievements in this worldand not from martyrdom to get into he next worldwe can help foster more young people with more reams than memories.
NDIA   you want to see this same process at work in a less virtual community, tudy the second largest Muslim country in the world.
The largest uslim country in the world is Indonesia and the second largest is not audi Arabia, Iran, Egypt, or Pakistan.
It is India.
With some 150 million uslims, India has more Muslims than Pakistan.
But here is an interest ng statistic from 9/11: There are no Indian Muslims that we know of in l-Qaeda and there are no Indian Muslims in America's Guantnamo ay post-9/11 prison camp.
And no Indian Muslims have been found ighting alongside the jihadists in Iraq.
Why is that?
Why do we not read bout Indian Muslims, who are a minority in a vast Hindu-dominated and, blaming America for all their problems and wanting to fly airplanes nto the Taj Mahal or the British embassy?
Lord knows, Indian Muslims ave their grievances about access to capital and political representation.
nd interreligious violence has occasionally flared up in India, with dis strous consequences.
I am certain that out of 150 million Muslims in ndia, a few will one day find their way to al-Qaedaif it can happen ith some American Muslims, it can happen with Indian Muslims.
But his is not the norm.
Why?
he answer is contextand in particular the secular, free-market, emocratic context of India, heavily influenced by a tradition of nonvio- 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 ence and Hindu tolerance.
M. J. Akbar, the Muslim editor of the Asian ge, a national Indian English-language daily primarily funded by nonMuslim Indians, put it to me this way: "I'll give you a quiz question: Which s the only large Muslim community to enjoy sustained democracy for the ast fifty years?
The Muslims of India.
I am not going to exaggerate Muslim ood fortune in India.
There are tensions, economic discrimination, and rovocations, like the destruction of the mosque at Ayodhya [by Hindu na ionalists in 1992].
But the fact is, the Indian Constitution is secular and rovides a real opportunity for economic advancement of any community hat can offer talent.
That's why a growing Muslim middle class here is oving up and generally doesn't manifest the strands of deep anger you ind in many nondemocratic Muslim states."
here Islam is embedded in authoritarian societies, it tends to be ome the vehicle of angry protestEgypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan.
ut where Islam is embedded in a pluralistic democratic societyTurkey or India, for instance those with a more progressive outlook ave a chance to get a better hearing for their interpretation and a dem cratic forum where they can fight for their ideas on a more equal foot ng.
On November 15, 2003, the two main synagogues of Istanbul were it by some fringe suicide bombers.
I happened to be in Istanbul a few onths later, when they were reopened.
Several things struck me.
To be in with, the chief rabbi appeared at the ceremony, hand in hand with he top Muslim cleric of Istanbul and the local mayor, while crowds in he street threw red carnations on them both.
Second, the prime minis er of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who comes from an Islamic party, aid a visit to the chief rabbi in his officethe first time a Turkish prime inister had ever called on the chief rabbi.
Lastly, the father of one of the uicide bombers told the Turkish newspaper Zaman, "We cannot under tand why this child had done the thing he had done .
First let us meet ith the chief rabbi of our Jewish brothers.
Let me hug him.
Let me kiss is hands and flowing robe.
Let me apologize in the name of my son and ffer my condolences for the deaths.
We will be damned if we do not econcile with them."
ifferent context, different narrative, different imagination.
am keenly aware of the imperfections of Indian democracy, starting  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ith the oppressive caste system.
Nevertheless, to have sustained a func ioning democracy with all itsflawsfor more than fifty years in a country f over one billion people, who speak scores of different languages, is omething of a miracle and a great source of stability for the world.
Two f India's presidents have been Muslims, and its current president, A.P.J.
bdul Kalam, is both a Muslim and the father of the Indian nuclear mis ile program.
While a Muslim woman sits on India's Supreme Court, no uslim woman is allowed even to drive a car in Saudi Arabia.
Indian uslims, including women, have been governors of many Indian states, nd the wealthiest man in India today, high on the Forbes list of global illionaires, is an Indian Muslim: Azim Premji, the chairman of Wipro, ne of India's most important technology companies.
I was in India hortly after the United States invaded Afghanistan in late 2001, when ndian television carried a debate between the country's leading female ovie star and parliamentarian Shabana Azmi, a Muslim woman  nd the imam of New Delhi's biggest mosque.
The imam had called on ndian Muslims to go to Afghanistan and join the jihad against America, nd Azmi ripped into him, live on Indian TV, basically telling the cleric o go take a hike.
She told him to go to Kandahar and join the Taliban nd leave the rest of India's Muslims alone.
How did she get away with hat?
Easy.
As a Muslim woman she lived in a context that empowered nd protected her to speak her mindeven to a leading cleric.
ifferent context, different narrative, different imagination.
his is not all that complicated: Give young people a context where hey can translate a positive imagination into reality, give them a context n which someone with a grievance can have it adjudicated in a court of aw without having to bribe the judge with a goat, give them a context in hich they can pursue an entrepreneurial idea and become the richest r the most creative or most respected people in their own country, no atter what their background, give them a context in which any com laint or idea can be published in the newspaper, give them a context in hich anyone can run for officeand guess what?
They usually don't ant to blow up the world.
They usually want to be part of it.
South Asian Muslim friend of mine once told me this story: His ndian Muslim family split in 1948, with half going to Pakistan and half 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 taying in Mumbai.
When he got older, he asked his father one day why he Indian half of the family seemed to be doing better than the Pakistani alf.
His father said to him, "Son, when a Muslim grows up in India and e sees a man living in a big mansion high on a hill, he says, 'Father, one ay, I will be that man.'
And when a Muslim grows up in Pakistan and ees a man living in a big mansion high on a hill, he says, 'Father, one ay I will kill that man.'"
When you have a pathway to be the Man or the oman, you tend to focus on the path and on achieving your dreams.
hen you have no pathway, you tend to focus on your wrath and on ursing your memories.
ndia only twenty years ago, before the triple convergence, was known s a country of snake charmers, poor people, and Mother Teresa.
Today ts image has been recalibrated.
Now it is also seen as a country of brainy eople and computer wizards.
Atul Vashistha, C E O of the outsourcing onsulting firm NeoIT, often appears in the American media to defend utsourcing.
He told me this story: "One day I had a problem with my P printerthe printing was very slow.
I was trying to figure out the roblem.
So I call HP tech support.
This guy answers and takes all my ersonal information down.
From his voice it is clear he is somewhere in ndia.
So I start asking where he is and how the weather is.
We're having  nice chat.
So after he is helping me for about ten or fifteen minutes he ays, 'Sir, do you mind if I say something to you?'
I said, 'Sure.'
I figured e was going to tell me something else I was doing wrong with my com uter and was trying to be polite about it.
And instead he says, 'Sir, I was ery proud to hear you on Voice of America.
You did a good job .
. '
I ad just been on a VOA show about the backlash against globalization nd outsourcing.
I was one of three invited guests.
There was a union of icial, an economist, and myself.
I defended outsourcing and this guy eard it."
emember: In the flat world you don't get just your humiliation ished out to you fiber-optically.
You also get your pride dished out to you iber-optically.
An Indian help-line operator suddenly knows, in real ime, all about how one of his compatriots is representing India half a orld away, and it makes him feel better about himself.
he French Revolution, the American Revolution, the Indian democ-  H E W O R L D IS F L A T acy, and even eBay are all based on social contracts whose dominant fea ure is that authority comes from the bottom up, and people can and do eel self-empowered to improve their lot.
People living in such contexts end to spend their time focusing on what to do next, not on whom to lame next.
HE  URSE F O I L thing has contributed more to retarding the emergence of a demo ratic context in places like Venezuela, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, and ran than the curse of oil.
As long as the monarchs and dictators who run hese oil states can get rich by drilling their natural resourcesas opposed o drilling the natural talents and energy of their peoplethey can stay in ffice forever.
They can use oil money to monopolize all the instruments f powerarmy, police, and intelligenceand never have to introduce eal transparency or power sharing.
All they have to do is capture and hold he oil tap.
They never have to tax their people, so the relationship between uler and ruled is highly distorted.
Without taxation, there is no representa ion.
The rulers don't really have to pay attention to the people or explain ow they are spending their moneybecause they have not raised that oney through taxes.
That is why countries focused on tapping their oil ells always have weak or nonexistent institutions.
Countries focused on apping their people have to focus on developing real institutions, prop rty rights, rule of law, independent courts, modern education, foreign rade, foreign investment, freedom of thought, and scientific inquiry to et the most out of their men and women.
In an essay in Foreign Affairs alled "Saving Iraq from Its Oil" (July-August 2004), development econ mists Nancy Birdsall and Arvind Subramanian point out that "34 lessdeveloped countries now boast significant oil and natural gas resources hat constitute at least 30 percent of their total export revenue.
Despite heir riches, however, 12 of these countries' annual per capita income re ains below $1,500 .
Moreover, two-thirds of the 34 countries are not 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 emocratic, and of those that are, only three score in the top half of reedom House's world rankings of political freedom."
n other words, imagination is also a product of necessitywhen the ontext you are living in simply does not allow you to indulge in certain scapist or radical fantasies, you don't.
Look where the most creative in ovation is happening in the Arab-Muslim world today.
It is in the places ith little or no oil.
As I noted earlier, Bahrain was one of the first Arab ulf states to discover oil and was the first Arab Gulf state to run out of oil.
nd today it is thefirstArab Gulf state to develop comprehensive labor re orm for developing the skills of its own workers, the first to sign a freetrade agreement with the United States, and thefirstto hold a free and fair lection, in which women could both run and vote.
And which countries n that same region are paralyzed or actually rolling back reforms?
Saudi rabia and Iran, which are awash in oil money.
On December 9, 2004, at  time when crude oil prices had soared to near $50 a barrel, The conomist did a special report from Iran, in which it noted, "Without oil t its present sky-high price, Iran's economy would be in wretched straits.
il provides about half the government's revenue and at least 80% of ex ort earnings.
But, once again under the influence of zealots in parlia ent, the oil cash is being spent on boosting wasteful subsidies rather han on much-needed development and new technology."
t is worthy of note that Jordan began upgrading its education system nd privatizing, modernizing, and deregulating its economy starting in 989precisely when oil prices were way down and it could no longer ely on handouts from the Gulf oil states.
In 1999, when Jordan signed ts free-trade agreement with the United States, its exports to America to aled $13 million.
In 2004, Jordan exported over $1 billion of goods to mericathings Jordanians made with their hands.
The Jordanian gov rnment has also installed computers and broadband Internet in every chool.
Most important, in 2004, Jordan announced a reform of its edu ation requirements for mosque prayer leaders.
Traditionally, high school tudents in Jordan took an exam for college entrance, and those who did he best became doctors and engineers.
Those who did the worst became osque preachers.
In 2004, Jordan decided to gradually phase in a new  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ystem.
Henceforth, to become a mosque prayer leader, a young man ill first have to get a B.A.
in some other subject, and can study Islamic aw only as a graduate degree in order to encourage more young men f talent to go into the clergy and weed out those who were just "failing" nto it.
That is an important change in context that should pay dividends ver time in the narratives that young Jordanians are nurtured upon in heir mosques.
"We had to go through a crisis to accept the need for re orm," said Jordan's minister of planning, Bassem Awadallah.
here is no mother of invention like necessity, and only when falling il prices force the leaders in the Middle East to change their contexts ill they reform.
People don't change when you tell them they should.
hey change when they tell themselves they must.
Or as Johns Hopkins oreign affairs professor Michael Mandelbaum puts it, "People don't hange when you tell them there is a better option.
They change when hey conclude that they have no other option."
Give me $10-a-barrel oil, nd I will give you political and economic reform from Moscow to iyadh to Iran.
If America and its allies will not collaborate in bringing own the price of crude oil, their aspirations for reform in all these areas ill be stillborn.
here is another factor to consider here.
When you have to make hings with your hands and then trade with others in order to flourish, ot just dig an oil well in your own backyard, it inevitably broadens imag nation and increases tolerance and trust.
It is no accident that Muslim ountries make up 20 percent of the world's population but account for nly 4 percent of world trade.
When countries don't make things anyone lse wants, they trade less, and less trade means less exchange of ideas nd openness to the world.
The most open, tolerant cities in the Muslim orld today are its trading centers Beirut, Istanbul, Jakarta, Dubai, ahrain.
The most open, tolerant cities in China are Hong Kong and hanghai.
The most closed cities in the world are in central Saudi rabia, where no Christians, Hindus, Jews, or other non-Muslims are al owed to express their religions in public or build a house of worship, nd, in the case of Mecca, even enter.
Religions are the smelters and ounders of imagination.
The more any religion's imagination Hindu, hristian, Jewish, Muslim, Buddhistis shaped in an isolated bubble,  1 / 9 V E R S U S 9/1 1 r in a dark cave, the more its imagination is likely to sail off in danger us directions.
People who are connected to the world and exposed to ifferent cultures and perspectives are far more likely to develop the magination of 11/9.
People who are feeling disconnected, for whom per onal freedom and fulfillment are a Utopian fantasy, are more likely to evelop the imagination of 9/11.
UST O N E OOD XAMPLE  anley Fischer, the former deputy managing director of the IMF, once emarked to me, "One good example is worth a thousand theories."
I elieve that is true.
Indeed, people do not change only when they must: hey also change when they see that others  like themselveshave hanged and flourished.
Or as Michael Mandelbaum also points out, People change as a result of what they notice, not just what they are old" especially when what they notice is someone just like them doing ell.
As I pointed out earlier, there is only one Arab company that devel ped a world-class business strong enough to get itself listed on the asdaq, and that was Aramex.
Every Jordanian, every Arab, should know nd take pride in the Aramex story, the way every American knows the pple and Microsoft and Dell stories.
It is the example that is worth a housand theories.
It should be the role model of a self-empowered Arab ompany, run by Arab brainpower and entrepreneurship, succeeding on he world stage and enriching its own workers at the same time.
hen Fadi Ghandour took Aramex public again in 2005, this time in ubai, some four hundred Aramex employees from all over the Arab orld who had stock options divided $14 million.
I will never forget Fadi elling me how proud these employees weresome of them managers, ome of them just delivery drivers.
This windfall was going to enable hem to buy homes or send their kids to better schools.
Imagine the dig ity that these people feel when they come back to their families and eighborhoods and tell everyone that they are going to build a new ouse because the world-class Arab company they work for has gone  H E W O R L D IS F L A T ublic.
Imagine how much dignity they feel when they see themselves etting ahead by succeeding in the flat world  not in the traditional iddle Eastern way by inheritance, by selling land, or by getting a gov rnment contract, but by working for a real company, an Arab company.
ust as it is no accident that there are no Indian Muslims in al-Qaeda, it s no accident that the three thousand Arab employees of Aramex want o deliver only packages that help economies grow and Arab people lourish not suicide bombs.
peaking of the Aramex employees with stock options, Ghandour aid, "They all feel like owners.
A lot of them came up to me and said, hank you, but I want to invest my options back in the company and be n investor in the new IPO.'"
ive me just one hundred more examples like Aramex, and I will tart to give you a different contextand narrative.
ROM  NTOUCHABLES O NTOUCHABLES d while you are at it, give me one hundred Abraham Georges as ell individuals who step out of their context and set a different xample can have such a huge impact on the imagination of so many thers.
One day in February 2004, I was resting in my hotel room in angalore when the phone rang.
It was a young Indian woman who said he was attending a private journalism school on the outskirts of the city nd wanted to know if I would come by and meet with her class.
I've earned over the years that these sorts of accidental invitations often lead o interesting encounters, so I said, "What the heck, sure.
I'll come."
Two ays later I drove ninety minutes from downtown Bangalore to an open ield in which stood a lonely journalism school and dormitory.
I was met t the door by a handsome middle-aged Indian man named Abraham eorge.
Born in Kerala, George served in the Indian Army, while his other immigrated to the United States and went to work for NASA.
eorge followed her, went on to study at NYU, started a software firm hat specialized in international finance, sold it in 1998, and decided to 1/9 V E R S U S 9/1 1 ome back to India and use his American-made fortune to try to change ndia from the bottomthe absolute bottom up.
ne thing George learned from his time in the United States was hat without more responsible Indian newspapers and journalists, the ountry could never improve its governance.
So he started a journalism chool.
As we sat in his office sipping juice, it quickly became apparent o me, though, that as proud as he was of his little journalism school, he as even more proud of the elementary school he had started in a village utside Bangalore populated by India's lowest caste, the untouchables, ho are not supposed to even get near Indians of a higher caste for fear hat they will pollute the very air they breathe.
George wanted to prove hat if you gave these untouchable children access to the same tech ologies and solid education that have enabled other pockets of India to lug in and play with the flat world, they could do the same.
The more e talked about the school, the more I wanted to see it and not talk jour alism.
So as soon as I finished speaking to his journalism students, we opped into his jeep, along with his principal, Lalita Law, and set out on  two-hour drive to the Shanti Bhavan school, which, as I explained in hapter 15, was located about ten miles and ten centuries from the out kirts of Bangalore.
The word "wretched" does not even begin to de cribe the living conditions in the villages around the school.
hen we eventually reached the school complex, though, we found eatly painted buildings, surrounded by some grass and flowers, a total ontrast to the nearby hamlets.
The first classroom we walked into had wenty untouchable kids at computers working on Excel and Microsoft ord.
Next door, another class was practicing typing on a computer typ ng program.
I loudly asked the teacher who was the fastest typist in the lass.
She pointed to an eight-year-old girl with a smile that could have elted a glacier.
I want to race you," I said to her.
All her classmates gathered round.
crunched myself into a tiny seat in the computer stall next to her, and e each proceeded to type the same phrase over and over, seeing who ould do more in a minute.
"Who's winning?"
I shouted.
Her classmates houted her name back and cheered her on.
I quickly surrendered to her leeful laugh.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T he selection process to get into Shanti Bhavan is based on whether  child is below the poverty line and the parents are willing to send him r her to a boarding school.
Shortly before I arrived, the students had aken the California Achievement Tests.
"We are giving them English ducation so they can go anywhere in India and anywhere in the world or higher education," said Law.
"Our goal is to give them a world-class ducation so they can aspire to careers and professions that would have een totally beyond their reach and have been so for generations.
round here, their names will always give them away as untouchables.
ut if they go somewhere else, and if they are really polished, with proper ducation and social graces, they can break this barrier."
hen they can become my kind of untouchablesyoung people ho one day can be special or specialized or adaptable.
ooking at these kids, George said, "When we talk about the poor, so ften it is talk about getting them off the streets or getting them a job, so hey don't starve.
But we never talk about getting excellence for the poor.
y thought was that we can deal with the issue of inequality if they ould break out of all the barriers imposed upon them.
If one is success ul, they will carry one thousand with them."
fter listening to George, my mind drifted back to only four months arlier, in the fall of 2003, when I had been in the West Bank filming nother documentary about the Arab-Israeli conflict.
As a part of that roject, I went to Ramallah and interviewed three young Palestinian ilitants who were members of Yasser Arafat's paramilitary Tanzim or anization.
What was so striking about the interview were the mood wings of these young men from suicidal despair to dreamy aspirations.
hen I asked one of the three, Mohammed Motev, what was the worst hing about living in the context of Israeli occupation, he said the check oints.
"When a soldier asks me to take off my clothes in front of the girls.
t's a great humiliation to me .
to take off my shirt and my pants and urn around and all the girls are standing there."
It is one reason, he said, hat all Palestinian young people today are just suicide bombers in wait ng.
He called them "martyrs in waiting," while his two friends nodded n assent.
They warned me that if Israel tried to kill Yasser Arafat, who as then still alive (and was a leader who knew how to stimulate only 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 emories, not dreams), they would turn the whole area into a living hell."
To underscore this point, Motev took out his wallet and showed e a picture of Arafat.
But what caught my eye was the picture of a oung girl next to it.
Who's that?"
I asked.
That was his girlfriend, he explained, slightly ed-faced.
So there was his walletYasser Arafat on one page, whom he as ready to die for, and his girlfriend on the other, whom he wanted to ive for.
A few minutes later, one of his colleagues, Anas Assaf, became motional.
He was the only one in college, an engineering student at Bir eit University near Ramallah.
After breathing fire about also being will ng to die for Arafat, he began waxing eloquent about how much he anted to go to the University of Memphis, where his uncle lived, "to tudy engineering."
Unfortunately, he said, he could not get a visa into he United States now.
Like his colleague, Assaf was ready to die for asser Arafat, but he wanted to live for the University of Memphis.
hese were good young men, not terrorists.
But their role models ere all angry men, and these young men spent a lot of their time imag ning how to unleash their anger, not realizing their potential.
Abraham eorge, by contrast, produced a different context and a different set of eacher role models for those untouchable children in his school, and ogether they planted in his students the seeds of a very different imag nation.
We must have more Abraham Georgeseverywhereby the housands: people who gaze upon a classroom of untouchable kids and ot only see the greatness in each of them but, more important, get them o see the greatness in themselves while endowing them with the tools to ring that out.
fter our little typing race at the Shanti Bhavan school, I went around he classroom and asked all the childrenmost of whom had been in chool, and out of a life of open sewers, for only three yearswhat they anted to be when they grew up.
These were eight-year-old Indian kids hose parents were untouchables.
It was one of the most moving experi nces of my life.
Their answers were as follows: "an astronaut," "a doc or," "a pediatrician," "a poetess," "physics and chemistry," "a scientist nd an astronaut," "a surgeon," "a detective," "an author."
ll dreamers in actionnot martyrs in waiting.
H E W O R L D IS F L A T  t me close with one last point.
My own daughter went off to college n the fall of 2004, and my wife and I dropped her off on a warm eptember day.
The sun was shining.
Our daughter was full of excite ent.
But I can honestly say it was one of the saddest days of my life.
And t wasn't just the dad-and-mom-dropping-their-eldest-child-off-at-school hing.
No, something else bothered me.
It was the sense that I was drop ing my daughter off into a world that was so much more dangerous than he one she had been born into.
I felt like I could still promise my daugh er her bedroom back, but I couldn't promise her the worldnot in the arefree way that I had explored it when I was her age.
That really both red me.
Still does.
he flattening of the world, as I have tried to demonstrate in this ook, has presented us with new opportunities, new challenges, new artners, but also, alas, new dangers, particularly as Americans.
It is im erative that we find the right balance among all of these.
It is imperative hat we be the best global citizens that we can be because in a flat orld, if you don't visit a bad neighborhood, it might visit you.
And it is mperative that while we remain vigilant to the new threats, we do not let hem paralyze us.
Most of all, though, it is imperative that we nurture ore people with the imaginations of Abraham George and Fadi handour.
The more people with the imagination of 11/9, the better hance we have of staving off another 9/11.
I refuse to settle for a world hat gets smaller in the wrong sense, in the sense that there are fewer and ewer places an American can go without a second thought and fewer nd fewer foreigners feeling comfortable about coming to America.
o put it another way, the greatest dangers we Americans face are an xcess of protectionism excessive fears of another 9/11 that prompt us o wall ourselves in, in search of personal securityand excessive fears of ompeting in a world of 11/9 that prompt us to wall ourselves off, in earch of economic security.
Either one would be a disaster for us and for he world.
es, I have said a lot about how economic competition in the flat 1/9 VERSUS 9/11 orld will be more intense and involve more players.
We Americans will ave to work harder, run faster, and become smarter to make sure that ore of us are able to connect and compete, collaborate and innovate on heflat-worldplatform and derive all the benefits it has to offer.
But re ember: the most important competition is now with yourself making ure that you are always striving to get the most out of your own imagi ation, and then acting on it.
can't tell any other society or culture what to say to its own children, ut I can tell you what I say to my own: The world is being flattened.
I idn't start it and you can't stop it, except at a great cost to human devel pment and your own future.
But we can tilt it, and shape it, for better or or worse.
If it is to be for better, not for worse, then you and your gener tion must not live in fear of either the terrorists or tomorrow, of either alQaeda or Infosys.
You can flourish in this flat world, but it does take the ight imagination and the right motivation.
While your lives have been owerfully shaped by 9/11, the world needs you to be forever the gener tion of 11/9the generation of strategic optimists, the generation with ore dreams than memories, the generation that wakes up each morn ng and not only imagines that things can be better but also acts on that magination every day..
