A New Practice for a New Reality IT'S POSSIBLE FOR a person to have an overwhelming number of things to do and still function productively with a clear head and a positive sense of relaxed control.
That's a great way to live and work, at elevated levels of effectiveness and efficiency.
It's also becoming a critical operational style required of successful and high-performing professionals.
You already know how to do everything necessary to achieve this high-performance state.
If you're like most people, however, you need to apply these skills in a more timely, complete, and systematic way so you can get on top of it all instead of feeling buried.
And though the method and the techniques I describe in this book Anxiety is caused are immensely practical and based on common sense, by a lack of control, most people will have some major work habits that organization, must be modified before they can implement this preparation, and system.
The small changes requiredchanges in the action.
way you clarify and organize all the things that com- .
David mand your attentioncould represent a significant shift in how you approach some key aspects of your day-to-day work.
Many of my clients have referred to this as a significant paradigm shift.
The methods I present here are all based on two key objectives:(1) capturing all the things that need to get donenow, later, someday, big, little, or in betweeninto a logical and trusted system outside of your head and off your mind; and (2) disciplining yourself to make front-end decisions about all of me "inputs" you THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE let into your life so that you will always have a plan for "next actions" that you can implement or renegotiate at any moment.
This book offers a proven method for this kind of highperformance workflow management.
It provides good tools, tips, techniques, and tricks for implementation.
As you'll discover, the principles and methods are instantly usable and applicable to everything you have to do in your personal as well as your professional life.
* You can incorporate, as many others have before you, what I describe as an ongoing dynamic style of operating in your work and in your world.
Or, like still others, you can simply use this as a guide to getting back into better control when you feel you need to.
The Problem: New Demands, Insufficient Resources Almost everyone I encounter these days feels he or she has too much to handle and not enough time to get it all done.
In the course of a single recent week, I consulted with a partner in a major global investment firm who was concerned that the new corporate-management responsibilities he was being offered would stress his family commitments beyond the limits; and with a midlevel human-resources manager trying to stay on top of her 150-plus e-mail requests per day fueled by the goal of doubling the company's regional office staff from eleven hundred to two thousand people in one year, all as she tried to protect a social life for herself on the weekends.
A paradox has emerged in this new millennium: people have *I consider "work," in its most universal sense, as meaning anything that you want or need to be different than it currently is.
Many people make a distinction between "work" and "personal life," but I don't: to me, weeding the garden or updating my will is just as much "work" as writing this book or coaching a client.
All the methods and techniques in this book are applicable across that life/work spectrumto be effective, they need to be.
CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY enhanced quality of life, but at the same time they are adding to their stress levels by taking on more than they have resources to handle.
It's as though their eyes were bigger than their stomachs.
And most people are to some degree frustrated and perplexed about how to improve the situation.
Work No Longer Has Clear Boundaries A major factor in the mounting stress level is that the actual nature of our jobs has changed much more dra- Time is the matically and rapidly than have our training for and quality of nature our ability to deal with work.
In just the last half of that keeps events the twentieth century, what constituted "work" in the from happening all industrialized world was transformed from assembly- at once.
Lately it doesn't seem to be line, make-it and move-it kinds of activity to what working.
Peter Drucker has so aptly termed "knowledge work."
Anonymous In the old days, work was self-evident.
Fields were to be plowed, machines tooled, boxes packed, cows milked, widgets cranked.
You knew what work had to be doneyou could see it.
It was clear when the work was finished, or not finished.
Now, for many of us, there are no edges to most of our projects.
Most people I know have at least half a dozen things they're trying to achieve right now, and even if they had the rest of their lives to try, they wouldn't be able to finish Almost every project could be these to perfection.
You're probably faced with the done better, and an same dilemma.
How good could that conference potentially be?
How effective could the training pro- infinite quantity of gram be, or the structure of your executives' compen- information is now available that could sation package?
How inspiring is the essay you're make that happen.
writing?
How motivating the staff meeting?
How functional the reorganization?
And a last question: How much available data could be relevant to doing those projects "better"?
The answer is, an infinite amount, easily accessible, or at least potentially so, through the Web.
On another front, the lack of edges can create more work THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE for everyone.
Many of today's organizational outcomes require cross-divisional communication, cooperation, and engagement.
Our individual office silos are crumbling, and with them is going the luxury of not having to read cc'd e-mails from the marketing department, or from human resources, or from some ad hoc, dealwith-a-certain-issue committee.
Our Jobs Keep Changing The disintegrating edges of our projects and our work in general would be challenging enough for anyone.
But now we must add to that equation the constantly shifting definition of our jobs.
I often ask in my seminars, "Which of you are doing only what you were hired to do?"
Seldom do I get a raised hand.
As amorphous as edgeless work may be, if you had the chance to stick with some specifically described job long enough, you'd probably figure out what you needed to dohow much, at what levelto stay sane.
But few have that luxury anymore, for two reasons: We can never really be prepared for that which is wholly new.
We have to adjust ,  ourselves, and every radical adjustment is a crisis in selfesteem: we undergo a test, we have to prove ourselves.
It needs subordinate self-confidence to face drastic change without inner trembling.
Eric Hoffer 1 | The organizations we're involved with seem to be in constant morph mode, with ever-changing goals, products, partners, customers, markets, technologies, and owners.
These all, by necessity, shake up structures, forms, roles, and responsibilities.
2 | The average professional is more of a free agent these days than ever before, changing careers as often as his or her parents once changed jobs.
Even fortysomethings and fiftysomethings hold to standards of continual growth.
Their aims are just more integrated into the mainstream now, covered by the catchall "professional, management, and executive development"which simply means they won't keep doing what they're doing for any extended period of time.
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY Little seems clear for very long anymore, as far as what our work is and what or how much input may be relevant to doing it well.
We're allowing in huge amounts of The burner I go, information and communication from the outer the behinder I get.
Anonymous world and generating an equally large volume of ideas and agreements with ourselves and others from our inner world.
And we haven't been well equipped to deal with this huge number of internal and external commitments.
The Old Models and Habits Are Insufficient Neither our standard education, nor traditional time-management models, nor the plethora of organizing tools available, such as personal notebook planners, Microsoft Outlook, or Palm personal digital assistants (PDAs), has given us a viable means of meeting the new demands placed on us.
If you've tried to use any of these processes or tools, you've probably found them unable to accommodate the speed, complexity, and changing priority factors inherent in what you The winds and waves are always are doing.
The ability to be successful, relaxed, and in on the side of the control during these fertile but turbulent times ablest navigators.
demands new ways of thinking and working.
There Edward Gibbon is a great need for new methods, technologies, and work habits to help us get on top of our world.
The traditional approaches to time management and personal organization were useful in their time.
They provided helpful reference points for a workforce that was just emerging from an industrial assembly-line modality into a new kind of work that included choices about what to do and discretion about when to do it.
When "time" itself turned into a work factor, personal calendars became a key work tool.
(Even as late as the 1980s many professionals considered having a pocket Day-Timer the essence of being organized, and many people today think of their calendar as the central tool for being in control.)
Along with discretionary time also came the need to make good choices about what to do.
"ABC" priority codes and daily "to-do" lists were key techniques THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE that people developed to help them sort through their choices in some meaningful way.
If you had the freedom to decide what to do, you also had the responsibility to make good choices, given your "priorities."
What you've probably discovered, at least at some level, is that a calendar, though important, can really effectively manage only a small portion of what you need to organize.
And daily to-do lists and simplified priority coding have proven inadequate to deal with the volume and variable nature of the average professional's workload.
More and more people's jobs are made up of dozens or even hundreds of e-mails a day, with no latitude left to ignore a single request, complaint, or order.
There are few people who can (or even should) expect to code everything an "A," a "B," or a "C" priority, or who can maintain some predetermined list of to-dos that the first telephone call or interruption from their boss won't totally undo.
The "Big Picture" vs. the Nitty-Gritty At the other end of the spectrum, a huge number of business books, models, seminars, and gurus have championed the "bigger view" as the solution to dealing with our complex world.
Clarifying major goals and values, so the thinking goes, gives order, meaning, and direction to our work.
In practice, however, the well-intentioned exercise of values thinking too often does not achieve its desired results.
I have seen too many of these efforts fail, for one or more of the following three reasons: 1 | There is too much distraction at the day-to-day, hour-tohour level of commitments to allow for appropriate focus on the higher levels.
2 | Ineffective personal organizational systems create huge subconscious resistance to undertaking even bigger projects and goals that will likely not be managed well, and that will in turn cause even more distraction and stress.
3 | When loftier levels and values actually are clarified, it raises CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY the bar of our standards, making us notice that much more that needs changing.
We are already having a serious negative reaction to the overwhelming number of things we have to do.
And what created much of the work that's on those lists in the first place?
Our values!
Focusing on values does not simplify your life.
It gives meaning and directionand a lot more complexity.
Focusing on primary outcomes and values is a critical exercise, certainly.
But it does not mean there is less to do, or fewer challenges in getting the work done.
Quite the contrary: it just ups the ante in the game, which still must be played day to day.
For a human-resources executive, for example, deciding to deal with quality-of-work-life issues in order to attract and keep key talent does not make things simpler.
There has been a missing piece in our new culture of knowledge work: a system with a coherent set of behaviors and tools that functions effectively at the level at which work really happens.
It must incorporate the results of big-picture thinking as well as the smallest of open details.
It must manage multiple tiers of priorities.
It must maintain control over hundreds of new inputs daily.
It must save a lot more time and effort than are needed to maintain it.
It must make it easier to get things done.
The Promise: The "Ready State" of the Martial Artist Reflect for a moment on what it actually might be like if your personal management situation were totally under control, at all levels and at all times.
What if you could dedicate fully 100 percent of your attention to whatever was at hand, at your own choosing, with no distraction?
It is possible.
There is a way to get a grip on it all, stay relaxed, and get meaningful things done with minimal effort, THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE Life is denied by lack of attention, whether it be to cleaning windows or trying to write a masterpiece..  Nadia Boulanger Your ability to generate power is directly proportional to your ability to relax.
across the whole spectrum of your life and work.
You can experience what the martial artists call a "mind like water" and top athletes refer to as the "zone," within the complex world in which you're engaged.
In fact, you have probably already been in this state from time to time.
It's a condition of working, doing, and being in which the mind is clear and constructive things are happening.
It's a state that is accessible by everyone, and one that is increasingly needed to deal effectively with the complexity of life in the twenty-first century.
More and more it will be a required condition for high-performance professionals who wish to maintain balance and a consistent positive output in their work.
World-class rower Craig Lambert has described how it feels in Mind Over Water (Houghton Miffin, 1998): Rowers have a word for this frictionless state: swing.
Recall the pure joy of riding on a backyard swing: an easy cycle of motion, the momentum coming from the swing itself.
The swing carries us; we do not force it.
We pump our legs to drive our arc higher, but gravity does most of the work.
We are not so much swinging as being swung.
The boat swings you.
The shell wants to move fast: Speed sings in its lines and nature.
Our job is simply to work with the shell, to stop holding it back with our thrashing struggles to go faster.
Trying too hard sabotages boat speed.
Trying becomes striving and striving undoes itself Social climbers strive to be aristocrats but their efforts prove them no such thing.
Aristocrats do not strive; they have already arrived.
Swing is a state of arrival.
The "Mind Like Water" Simile In karate there is an image that's used to define the position of perfect readiness: "mind like water."
Imagine throwing a pebble into a still pond.
How does the water respond?
The answer is, CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY totally appropriately to the force and mass of the If your mind is input; then it returns to calm.
It doesn't overreact or empty, it is always ready for anything; underreact.
it is open to The power in a karate punch comes from speed, everything.
not muscle; it comes from a focused "pop" at the end Sbunryu Suzuki of the whip.
That's why petite people can learn to break boards and bricks with their hands: it doesn't take calluses or brute strength, just the ability to generate a focused thrust with speed.
But a tense muscle is a slow one.
So the high levels of training in the martial arts teach and demand balance and relaxation as much as anything else.
Clearing the mind and being flexible are key.
Anything that causes you to overreact or underreact can control you, and often does.
Responding Anything that inappropriately to your e-mail, your staff, your proj- causes you to ects, your unread magazines, your thoughts about overreact or underreact can what you need to do, your children, or your boss will control you, and lead to less effective results than you'd like.
Most often does.
people give either more or less attention to things than they deserve, simply because they don't operate with a "mind like water."
There is one thing we can do, and the Can You Get into Your "Productive State" happiest people are When Required?
those who can do Think about the last time you felt highly productive.
it to the limit of You probably had a sense of being in control; you their ability.
We were not stressed out; you were highly focused on can be completely what you were doing; time tended to disappear present.
We can (lunchtime already?
); and you felt you were making be all here.
We noticeable progress toward a meaningful outcome.
can .
give all our attention to Would you like to have more such experiences?
And if you get seriously far out of that the opportunity stateand start to feel out of control, stressed before us.
 out, unfocused, bored, and stuckdo you have the Mark ability to get yourself back into it?
That's where the THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE methodology of Getting Things Done will have the greatest impact on your life, by showing you how to get back to "mind like water," with all your resources and faculties functioning at a maximum level.
The Principle: Dealing Effectively with Internal Commitments A basic truism I have discovered over twenty years of coaching and training is that most of the stress people experience comes from inappropriately managed commitments they make or accept.
Even those who are not consciously "stressed out" will invariably experience greater relaxation, better focus, and increased productive energy when they learn more effectively to control the "open loops" of their lives.
You've probably made many more agreements with yourself than you realize, and every single one of them-big or littleis being tracked by a less-than-conscious part of you.
These are the "incompletes," or "open loops," which I define as anything pulling at your attention that doesn't belong where it is, the way it is.
Open loops can include everything from really big to-do items like "End world hunger" to the more modest "Hire new assistant" to the tiniest task such as "Replace electric pencil sharpener."
It's likely that you also have more internal commitments currently in play than you're aware of.
Consider how many things you feel even the smallest amount of responsibility to Anything that does change, finish, handle, or do something about.
You not belong where it have a commitment, for instance, to deal in some is, the way it is, is way with every new communication landing in your an "open loop" e-mail, on your voice-mail, and in your in-basket.
pulling on your And surely there are numerous projects that you attention.
sense need to be defined in your areas of responsibility, as well as goals and directions to be clarified, a career to be managed, and life in general to be kept in balance.
You have accepted some level of internal responsibility for every12 CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY thing in your life and work that represents an open loop of any sort.
In order to deal effectively with all of that, you must first identify and collect all those things that are "ringing your bell" in some way, and then plan how to handle them.
That may seem like a simple thing to do, but in practice most people don't know how to do it in a consistent way.
The Basic Requirements for Managing Commitments Managing commitments well requires the implementation of some basic activities and behaviors:  First of all, if it's on your mind, your mind isn't clear.
Anything you consider unfinished in any way must be captured in a trusted system outside your mind, or what I call a collection bucket, that you know you'll come back to regularly and sort through.
 Second, you must clarify exactly what your commitment is and decide what you have to do, if anything, to make progress toward fulfilling it.
 Third, once you've decided on all the actions you need to take, you must keep reminders of them organized in a system you review regularly.
An Important Exercise to Test This Model I suggest that you write down the project or situation that is most on your mind at this moment.
What most "bugs" you, distracts you, or interests you, or in some other way consumes a large part of your conscious attention?
It may be a project or problem that is really "in your face," something you are being pressed to handle, or a situation you feel you must deal with sooner rather than later.
Maybe you have a vacation trip coming up that you need to make some major last-minute decisions about.
Or perhaps you just inherited six million dollars and you don't know what to do with the cash.
