The methods I present here are all based on two key objectives:(1) capturing all the things that need to get donenow, later, someday, big, little, or in betweeninto a logical and trusted system outside of your head and off your mind; and (2) disciplining yourself to make front-end decisions about all of me "inputs" you THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE let into your life so that you will always have a plan for "next actions" that you can implement or renegotiate at any moment.
In the course of a single recent week, I consulted with a partner in a major global investment firm who was concerned that the new corporate-management responsibilities he was being offered would stress his family commitments beyond the limits; and with a midlevel human-resources manager trying to stay on top of her 150-plus e-mail requests per day fueled by the goal of doubling the company's regional office staff from eleven hundred to two thousand people in one year, all as she tried to protect a social life for herself on the weekends.
There is a way to get a grip on it all, stay relaxed, and get meaningful things done with minimal effort, THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE Life is denied by lack of attention, whether it be to cleaning windows or trying to write a masterpiece..  Nadia Boulanger Your ability to generate power is directly proportional to your ability to relax.
Responding Anything that inappropriately to your e-mail, your staff, your proj- causes you to ects, your unread magazines, your thoughts about overreact or underreact can what you need to do, your children, or your boss will control you, and lead to less effective results than you'd like.
That's where the THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE methodology of Getting Things Done will have the greatest impact on your life, by showing you how to get back to "mind like water," with all your resources and faculties functioning at a maximum level.
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY The Real Work of Knowledge Work Welcome to the real-life experience of "knowledge work," and a profound operational principle: You have to think about your stuff more than you realize but not as much as you're afraid you might.
Most people have a resistance to initiating the burst of energy that it will take to clarify the real meaning, for them, of something they have let into their world, and to decide what they need to do about it.
We're never really taught that we have to think about our work before we can do it; much of our daily activity is already defined for us by the undone and unmoved things staring at us when we come to work, or by the family to be fed, the laundry to be done, or the children to be dressed at home.
Why Things Are on Your Mind Most often, the reason something is "on your mind" is that you want it to be different than it currently is, and yet:  you haven't clarified exactly what the intended outcome is;  you haven't decided what the very next physical action step is; and/or  you haven't put reminders of the outcome and the action required in a system you trust.
It knows all the things we whether or not you've come to the conclusions you have to do is the need to, and whether you've put the resulting outsingle largest comes and action reminders in a place that can be consumer of time trusted to resurface appropriately within your conand energy.
After all:  you don't manage five minutes and wind up with six;  you don't manage information overloadotherwise you'd walk into a library and die, or the first time you connected to the Web, or even opened a phone book, you'd blow up; and  you don't manage prioritiesyou have them.
Managing Action Is the Prime Challenge What you do with your time, what you do with information, and what you do with your body and your focus relative to your CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR ANEW REALITY prioritiesthose are the real options to which you must allocate your limited resources.
In training and coaching thousands of professionals, I have found that lack of time is not the major issue for them (though they themselves may think it is); the real problem is a lack of clarity and definition about what a project Things rarely get really is, and what the associated next-action steps stuck because of required are.
But if you made that kind of review a characteristic of your ongoing life- and work style, and you maintained it across all areas of your life (not just the most "urgent"), you'd be practicing the kind of "black belt" management style I'm describing.
Sally Kempton means that as soon as you tell yourself that you need to do something, and store it in your RAM, there's a part of you that thinks you should be doing that something all the time.
In order for your mind to let go of the lower-level task of trying to hang on THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE to everything, you have to know that you have truly captured everything that might represent something you have to do, and that at some point in the near future you will process and review all of it.
Gathering 100 Percent of the "Incompletes" In order to eliminate "holes in the bucket," you need to collect and gather together placeholders for or representations of all the things you consider incomplete in your worldthat is, anything personal or professional, big or little, of urgent or minor importance, that you think ought to be different than it currently is and that you have any level of internal commitment to changing.
In order to manage this inventory of open loops appropri- CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW ately, you need to capture it into "containers" that hold items in abeyance until you have a few moments to decide what they are and what, if anything, you're going to do about them.
Emptying the bucket does not mean that you have to finish what's in your voice-mail, e-mail, or in-basket; it just means you have to take it out of the container, decide what it is and what should be done with it, and, if it's still unfinished, organize it into your system.
When the head of a major department in a global corporation had finished processing all her open items with me, she sat back in awe and told me that though she had been able to relax about what meetings to go to thanks to her trust in her calendar, she had never felt that same relief about all the many other aspects of her job, which we had just clarified together.
The whole dealboth the processing and THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE WORKFLOW DIAGRAMPROCESSING CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW organizing phasesis captured in the center "trunk" of the decision-tree model shown here.
To manage actionable things, you will need a list of projects, storage or files for project plans and materials, a calendar, a list of reminders of next actions, and a list of reminders of things you're waiting for.
What does need to be tracked is every action that has to happen at a specific time or on a specific day (enter these in your calendar); those that need to be done as soon as they can (add these to your "Next Actions" lists); and all those that you are waiting for others to do (put these on a "Waiting For" list).
Perhaps you told Mioko you would call her on Friday to check that the THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE report you're sending her is OK. She won't have the report until Thursday, and she's leaving the country on Saturday, so Friday is the time window for taking the actionbut anytime Friday will be fine.
On a quick browse, you see that the program that really interests you is still four months awaytoo distant for you to move on it yet (you're not sure what your travel schedule will be that far out), but if you are in town, you'd like to go.
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW Typical Partial "Someday/Maybe" List Get a bass-fishing boat Learn Spanish Take a watercolor class Create promotional videos of staff Find Stafford Lyons Get a digital video camera * Get a sideboard for the kitchen Build a lap pool Northern Italy trip Apprentice with my carpenter Get Kathryn a scooter Take a balloon ride Spotlight our artwork Build a koi pond Build a wine cellar Take a trip through Montana Digitize old photos and videos Have a neighborhood party Learn Photoshop software capabilities Set up a not-for-profit foundation Set up remote-server access at home You'll probably have some subcategories in your master "Someday/Maybe" list, such as  CDs I might want  Videos to rent  Books to read  Wine to taste  Weekend trips to take  Things to do with the kids  Seminars to take You must review this list periodically if you're going to get the most value from it.
You need somewhere to keep the instruction manual for your cell phone, CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW the notes from the meeting about the Smith project, and those few yen that you didn't get to change at the end of your last trip to Tokyo (and that you'll use when you go back there).
The Weekly Review is the time to The affairs of life embrace a multitude of interests, and he who reasons in any one of them, without consulting the rest, is a visionary unsuited to control the business of the world.
The Threefold Model for Evaluating Daily Work When you're getting things done, or "working" in the universal sense, there are three different kinds of activities you can be engaged in:  Doing predefined work  Doing work as it shows up  Defining your work Doing Predefined Work When you're doing predefined work, you're working off your "Next Actions" listscompleting tasks that you have previously determined need to be done, managing your workflow.
50,000+ feet: Life  40,000 feet: Three- to five-year vision  30,000 feet: One- to two-year goals  20,000 feet: Areas of responsibility  10,000 feet: Current projects  Runway: Current actions Let's start from the bottom up: Runway: Current Actions This is the accumulated list of all the actions you need to takeall the phone calls you have to make, the e-mails you have to respond to, the errands you've got to run, and the agendas you want to communicate to your boss and your spouse.
Most of the thinking you'll need to do is informal, what I call back-of-the-envelope planningthe kind of thing you do literally on the back of an envelope in a coffee shop with a colleague as you're hashing out the agenda and structure of CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING a sales presentation.
Finally (assuming that you're really committed to the project in this case, going out to dinner), you focus on the next action that you need to take to make the first component actually happen.
You have an urge to make something happen; you image the outcome; you generate ideas that might be relevant; you sort those into a structure; and you define a physical activity that would begin to make it a reality.
When you really know the underlying "why"for the conference, for the staff party, for the If you're not sure elimination of the management position, or for the why you're doing mergerit expands your thinking about how to something, you can never do enough make the desired result happen.
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING Vision/Outcome In order most productively to access the conscious and unconscious resources available to you, you must have a clear picture in your mind of what success would look, sound, and feel like.
The reticular formation is basically the gateway to your conscious awareness; it's the switch that turns on your perception of ideas and data, the thing that keeps you asleep even when music's playing but wakes you if a special little baby cries in another room.
It can be CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING quite a challenge, however, to identify with images of You often need to success if they represent new and foreign territory make it up in your that is, if you have few reference points about what mind before you an event might actually look like and little experience can make it happen in your life.
Distributed Cognition The great thing about external brainstorming is that in addition to capturing your original ideas, it can help generate many new ones that might not have occurred to you if you didn't have a mechanism to hold your thoughts and continually Nothing is more dangerous than an reflect them back to you.
That's why good thinking can happen while you're working on a computer document about a project, mind-mapping it on a legal pad of on a paper tablecloth in a hip restaurant, or just having a meeting about it with other people in a room that allows you to hold the context (a whiteboard with nice wet markers really helps there, too).
Making a list can be a creative thing to do, a way to consider the people who should be on your team, the customer requirements for the software, or the components of the business plan.
In general, the reason things are on your mind is that the THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE j PART ONE outcome and the action step(s) have not been appropriately defined, and/or reminders of them have not been put in places where you can be trusted to look for them appropriately.
If the brainstorming session gets bogged down with fuzzy thinking, the focus should shift back to the vision of the outcome, ensuring that the reticular filter in the brain will open up to deliver the best how-to thinking.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE And if there is a plan, but the rubber still isn't hitting the road like it should, someone needs to assess each component with the focus of "What's the next action, and who's got it?"
In the last two chapters, I have covered the basic models of how to stay maximally productive and in control, with minimal effort, at the two most basic levels of our life and work: the actions we take and the projects we enter into that generate many of those actions.
If you and creativity then capexponentially when tured that value-added thought into some place that you think about the would trigger you to act, you'd feel better already, right things at the have a clearer head, and get more positive things right time and have done.
Much of learning how to manage workflow in a "black belt" way is about laying out the gear and practicing the moves so that the requisite thinking happens more automatically and it's a lot easier to get engaged in the game.
* For many of the executives I work with, holding the world back for two contiguous days is the hardest part of the whole process the perceived necessity to be constantly available for meetings and communications when they're "at work" is difficult for them to let go of.
Lists can be managed simply in a low-tech way, as pieces of paper kept in a file folder (e.g., separate sheets/notes for each person you need to call in a "Calls" file), or they can be arranged in a more "mid-tech" fashion, in loose-leaf notebooks or planners (a page titled "Calls" with the names listed down the sheet).
tem can be one of the greatest obstacles to imple- CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLS menting a personal management system, and for most of the executives I have personally coached, it represents one of the biggest opportunities for improvement.
Many times I have driven to the local office-supply store with a client and bought a filing cabinet, a big stock of file folders, and a labeler, just so we could create an appropriate place in which to put two-thirds of the "stuff" lying around his/her desk and credenza and even on the office floors.
If you have to get up every time you have some ad hoc piece of paper you want to file, you'll tend to stack it instead of filing it, and you're also likely to just resist the whole in-basket process (because you subconsciously know there's stuff in there that might need filing!).
Get Rid of Hanging Files If You Can At the risk of seriously offending a lot of people who are already using hanging files, I recommend that you totally do away with the hanging-file hardware and use just plain folders standing up by themselves in the CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLS file drawer, held up by the movable metal plate in the back.
If you've decided to commit a certain amount of time to setting up your workflow system, there's one more thing that you'll need to do to make it maximally effective: you must clear the decks of any other commitments for the duration of the session.
There are very practical reasons to gather everything before you start processing it: 1 | it's helpful to have a sense of the volume of stuff you have to deal with; 2 | it lets you know where the "end of the tunnel" is; and 3 | when you're processing and organizing, you don't want to be distracted psychologically by an amorphous mass of stuff that might still be "somewhere."
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Issues About Collecting As you engage in the collecting phase, you may run into one or more of the following:  you've got a lot more than will fit into one in-basket;  you're likely to get derailed into purging and organizing;  you may have some form of stuff already collected and organized; and/or  you're likely to run across some critical things that you want to keep in front of you.
Information Delegated tasks/projects Completions critical to projects Replies to: Letters Memos Calls Proposals Requisitions Reimbursements Petty cash Insurance Ordered items Items being repaired Tickets Decisions of others Professional development Training/seminars Things to learn Things to look up Skills to practice/learn especially re: computers Tape/video training Resumes Outside education Research need to find out about... Professional wardrobe PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Personal Projects started, not completed Projects that need to be started Commitments/promises to others Spouse Children Family Friends Professionals Borrowed items Projects: other organizations Service Civic Volunteer Communications to make/get Family Friends Professional Initiate or respond to: Phone calls Letters Cards Upcoming events Special occasions Birthdays Bills Banks Investments Loans Taxes Insurance Legal affairs Filing Waiting for.
In addition to the paper-based and physical items in your inbasket, your inventory of "in" should include any resident voicemails and all the e-mails that are currently staged in the "in" area of your communication software.
For instance, if you pick up something from "in" and realize, "I've got to call Andrea about PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO WORKFLOW DIAGRAMPROCESSING CHAPTER 6 I PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY that, but I've got to do it on Monday, when she's in her office," then you'll defer that action immediately and enter it into your calendar for Monday.
Top Item First Even if the second item down is a personal note to you from the president of your country, and the top item is a piece of junk mail, you've got to process the junk mail first!
The point of all of these incubation procedures is that they give you a way to get the items off your mind right now and let you feel confident that some reminder of the possible action will resurface at an appropriate time.
The next action should be easy to figure out, but there are often some quick analyses and several planning steps that haven't occurred yet in your mind, and these have to happen before you can determine precisely what has to happen to complete the item, even if it's a fairly simple one.
When you get to a phone or to your computer, you want to have all your thinking completed so you can use the tools you have and the location you're in to more easily get things done, having already defined what there is to do.
The rationale for the two-minute rule is that that's more or less the point where it starts taking longer to store and track an item than to deal with it the first time it's in your hands-in other words, it's the efficiency cutoff.
If you've got to get to the bottom of all your input rapidly, in order to figure out how best to use your afternoon, then you may want to shorten the time to one minute, or even thirty seconds, so you can get through everything a little faster.
For instance, if you act to replace the cartridge in your favorite pen and discover that you're out of cartridge refills, you'll want to decide on the next action about getting them ("Buy refills at the store") and do, delegate, or defer it appropriately.
A call you need to make to a customer; an e-mail you need to spend a little time thinking about and drafting to your team; a gift you need to buy for your brother at the stationery store; a piece of software you need to download from the Web and PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO try out; a conversation you must have with your spouse about an investment you think you should makeall of these fit that description.
The "Pending" Things That Are Left If you follow the instructions in this chapter, you'll dump a mess of things, file a bunch, do a lot of two-minute actions, and hand off a number of items to other people.
There's still going to be something about "car alarm" to CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY do after the call to Frank, and there will still be something to handle about the conference after the e-mail to Bernadette.
I hope you're able to see the very practical reason for defining projects as broadly as I do: If the action step you've identified will not complete the commitment, then you'll need some stake in the ground to keep reminding you Right now you of actions you have pending until you have closure.
Organizing: Setting Up the Right Buckets HAVING A TOTAL and seamless system of organization in place gives you tremendous power because it allows your mind to let go of lower-level thinking and graduate to intuitive focusAirtight organization ing, undistracted by matters that haven't been dealt is required for your focus to remain on the broader horizon.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS WORKFLOW DIAGRAMORGANIZING PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO The Basic Categories There are seven primary types of things that you'll want to keep track of and manage from an organizational perspective:  A "Projects" list  Project support material  Calendared actions and information  "Next Actions" lists  A "Waiting For" list  Reference material  A "Someday/Maybe" list The Importance of Hard Edges It's critical that all of these categories be kept pristinely distinct from one another.
All You Really Need Is Lists and Folders Once you know what you need to keep track of (covered in the previous chapter, on Processing), all you really need is lists and CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS folders for reference and support materials.
The list is just a way for you to keep track of the total inventory of active things to which you have made a commitment, and to have that inventory available for review.
The Actions That Go on Your Calendar For the purposes of organization, as I've said, there are two basic kinds of actions: those that must be done on a certain day and/or at a particular time, and those that just need to be done as soon as you can get to them, around your other calendared items.
You may have realized that the next action on The calendar should getting a medical checkup, for example, was to call show only the "hard and make the appointment, and so (since the action landscape" around required two minutes or less) you actually did it when which you do the it occurred to you.
When the calendar is relegated to its proper role in organizing, the majority of the actions that you need to do are left in the category of "as soon as possible, against all the other things I have to do."
Organizing As-Soon-As-Possible Actions by Context Over many years I have discovered that the best way to be reminded of an "as soon as I can" action is by the particular context required for that actionthat is, either the tool or the location or the person needed to complete it.
If, however, you have fifty or a hundred next actions pending, keeping all of those on one big list would make it too difficult to see what you needed to see; each time you got any window of time to do something, you'd have to do unproductive resorting.
The Most Common Categories of Action Reminders You'll probably find that at least a few of the following common list headings for next actions will make sense for you:  "Calls"  "At Computer" "Errand's"  "Office Actions" or "At Office" (miscellaneous)  "At Home"  "Agendas" (for people and meetings)  "Read/Review" "Calls" This is the list of all the phone calls you need to make; you can work off it as long as you have a phone available.
The more mobile you are (especially if you have a cell phone), the more useful you'll find it to have one single list of all your calls: those strange little windows of time that you wind up with when you're off-site or travelingon a break or waiting for a plane, maybeoffer a perfect opportunity to work down your list.
This will allow you to see all your options for computer work to do, reminding you of all the e-mails you need to send, the documents you need to draft or edit, and so on.
For instance, as soon as you realize you need something from the hardware store, you might want to make "Hardware Store" the list item and then append a sublist of all the things you want to pick up there, as you think of them.
On the low-tech end, you could create a "Hardware Store" Post-it; on the high-tech side, if you were using a digital list, you We must strive to could attach a "note" to "Hardware Store" on your list reach that and input the details there.
"Office Actions'/"At Office" If you work in an office, there will be certain things that you can do only there, and a list of those will be a useful thing to have in front of you thenthough obviously, if you have a phone and a computer in your office, and you have "Calls" and "At Computer" as separate lists, they'll be in play as well.
Standing meetings You have to talk to your partner about an idea for next year; you want to check with your spouse about and people you deal with on an ongoing his schedule for the spring; you need to delegate a task to your secretary that's too complicated to basis may need their own "Agenda" explain in an e-mail.
As you're walking around the site after he's left for the day, you may notice several things you need to talk with him about, and you'll want that list to be easy to capture and to access as needed.
A pristine delineation will at least make you conscious of the inventory, and if you're like most people, having some type of selfregulating mechanism will help you become more aware of what you want to keep and what you should just get rid of.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS It's practical to have that stack of reading material at hand and easy to grab on the run when you're on your way to a meeting that may be late starting, a seminar that may have a window of time when nothing is going on, or a den- Those who make tist appointment that may keep you waiting to get the worst use of your teeth cleaned.
Organizing "Waiting For" Like reminders of the actions you need to do, reminders of all the things that you're waiting to get back from or get done by others have to be sorted and grouped.
You won't necessarily be tracking discrete action steps here, but more often final deliverables or projects that others are responsible for, such as the tickets you've ordered from the theater, the scanner that's coming for the office, the OK on the proposal from your client, and so on.
If the next action on a service order is to make a call, it should be in a "Calls" group; if the action step is to review information and input it into the computer, it should be labeled "At Computer."
It means that you've DELETED what you could, FILED what you wanted to keep but don't need to act on, DONE the less-than-two-minute responses, and moved into your reminder folders all the things you're waiting for and all your actionable e-mails.
If you haven't done so already, I recommend that initially you make a "Projects" list in a very simple format, similar to the ones you've used for your lists of actions: it can be a category in a digital organizer, a page in a loose-leaf planner, or even a single file folder labeled "PROJECTS," with either a master list or separate sheets of paper for each one.
The real value of the "Projects" list lies in the current "Projects" complete review it can provide (at least once a week), list is the major allowing you to ensure that you have action steps operational tool for defined for all of your projects, and that nothing is moving from treeslipping through the cracks.
Frankly, it doesn't matter how many different lists of projects you have, so long as you look at the contents of all of them as often as you need to, since for the most part you'll do that in one fell swoop during your Weekly Review.
While you could, of course, put them on your "Waiting For" list, it might make better sense to create a "ProjectsDelegated" list to track CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS them: your task will be simply to review the list regularly enough to ensure that everything on it is moving along appropriately.
If you make the large project your one listing on your "Projects" list, you'll want to keep a list of the subprojects and/or the project plan itself as "project support material" to be reviewed when you come to that major item.
If you're not * sure, I'd vote for putting your Big Projects on the "Projects" list and holding the subpieces in your project support How you list material, making sure to include them in your projects and Weekly Review, If that arrangement doesn't feel subprojects is up to quite right, try including the active and independent you; just be sure subprojects as separate entries on your master list.
The problem is that next actions and "Waiting For" items on these projects have usually not been determined and are psychologically still embedded in the stacks and the folders giving them the aura of just more "stuff" that repels its (un)organizer instead of attracting him or her to action.
When you're on the run, in the heat of the activities of the day, files like that are the last thing you'll want to pick up and peruse for actions.
Finally, when it's time to actually do an action, like making a call to someone about the project, you can pull out all the materials you think you might need to have as support during the conversation.
To return to the previous example of moving into a new house, you could have a folder labeled "New House" containing all the plans and details and notes about the landscaping and the kitchen and the basement.
The problem here is that some material is just facts or historical data that needs to be stored as background for when you might be able to use it, and some of what must be tracked is the actions required to move the relationships forward.
If you're keeping a "Projects" list within the software, you can go to the project you had a thought about, open or attach a "note" to it, and type in your idea.
You need to feel projects, priorities, comfortable storing even a single piece of paper that you might want to refer to later, and your system must be informal and accessible enough that it's a snap to file it away in your alphabetized general-reference system, right at hand where you work.
For instance, if you're managing a corporate merger and need to keep hold of a lot of the paperwork, you may want to dedicate two or three whole file cabinets to all the documentation required in the due-diligence process.
You don't need to do anything with that information, unless you need it when you're away from a Web connection, in which case you should print the data out when you're online and store it in a file you can take with you.
These could range from a special trip you might want to take one day, to books you might want to read, to projects you might want to tackle in the next fiscal year, to skills and talents you might want to develop.
If you acknowledge the power of the imagination to foster changes in perception and performance, it's easy to see how having a "Someday/Maybe" list out in front of your conscious mind could potentially add many wonderful adventures to your life and work.
to acquire  Trips to take  Organizations to join  Service projects to contribute to  Things to see and do Reassess Your Current Projects Now's a good time to review your "Projects" list from a more elevated perspective (that is, the standpoint of your job and goals) and consider whether you might transfer some of your current commit- What lies in our ments to "Someday/Maybe."
These kinds of lists can be a cross between reference and "Someday/Maybe"reference because you can just collect and add to lists of good wines or restaurants or books, to consult as you like; "Someday/Maybe" because you might want to review the listed items on a regular basis to remind yourself to try one or more of them at some point.
Usually much of that stuff needs to be tossed, some of it needs to go into "Read/Review," some needs to be filed as reference, some belongs on the calendar or in a tickler file (see page 173) for review in a month or perhaps at the beginning of the next quarter, and some actually has next actions on it.
Here are a few of the myriad things you should consider inserting:  Triggers for activating projects  Events you might want to participate in  Decision catalysts Triggers for Activating Projects If you have a project that you don't really need to think about now but that deserves a flag at some point in the future, you can pick an appropriate date and put a reminder about the project in your calendar for that day.
It should go in some day-specific (versus time-specific) calendar slot for the things you want to be reminded of on that day; then when the day arrives, you see the reminder and insert the item as an active project on your "Projects" list.
Essentially the tickler is a simple file-folder system that allows you to distribute paper and other physical reminders in such a way that whatever you want to see on a particular date in the future "automatically" shows up that day in your in-basket.
In the same way, when the next monthly file reaches the front (on October 31 after you empty the daily file, the "November" file will be the next one, with the daily files "1" through "31" behind it), it's emptied into the in-basket and refiled at the back of the monthlies to represent November a year from now.
The big advantage of using file folders for your tickler system is that they allow you to store actual documents (the form that needs CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS FILE-FOLDER-STYLE SAMPLE SETUP (OCTOBER 5) to be filled out on a certain day, the memo that needs to be reviewed then, the telephone note that needs action on a specific date, etc.).
The More Novel the Situation, the More Control Is Required The degree to which any of us needs to maintain checklists and external controls is directly related to our unfamiliarity with the area of responsibility.
If your CEO suddenly disappeared, for example, and you had instantly to fill his shoes, you'd need some overviews and outlines in front of you for a while to ensure that you had all the mission-critical aspects of the job handled.
For instance, when my wife and I decided to create a Checklists can be brand-new structure for a business we'd been highly useful to let involved with for many years, I took on areas of you know what you responsibility I'd never had to deal with before don't need to be namely, accounting, computers, marketing, legal, and concerned about.
To spark your creative thinking, here's a list of some of the topics of checklists I've seen and used over the years:  Personal Affirmations (i.e., personal value statements)  Job Areas of Responsibility (key responsibility areas)  Travel Checklist (everything to take on or do before a trip)  Weekly Review (everything to review and/or update on a weekly basis)  Training Program Components (all the things to handle when putting on an event, front to back)  Clients  Conference Checklist (everything to handle when putting on a conference)  Focus Areas (key life roles and responsibilities)  Key People in My Life/Work (relationships to assess regularly for completion and opportunity development)  Organization Chart (key people and areas of output to manage and maintain)  Personal Development (things to evaluate regularly to ensure personal balance and progress) Get comfortable with checklists, both ad hoc and more permanent.
If in fact you have now collected everything that represents an open loop in your life and work, processed each one of those items in \ PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO terms of what it means to you and what actions are required, and organized the results into a complete system that holds a current and complete overviewlarge and smallof all your present and "someday" projects, then you're ready for the next phase of implementation in the art of stress-free productivitythe review process.
If you have a list of calls you must make, for example, the minute that list is not totally current with all the calls you need to make, your brain will not trust the system, and it won't get relief from its lower-level mental tasks.
What to Look At, When Your personal system and behaviors need to be established in such a way that you can see all the action options you need to see, when you need to see them.
When you have access to a phone and any discretionary time, you ought to at least glance at the list of all the phone calls you need to make, and then either direct yourself to the best one to handle or give yourself permission to feel OK about not bothering with any of them.
When you're about to go in for a discussion with your boss or your partner, take a moment to review the outstanding agendas you have with him or her, so you'll know that you're using your time most effectively.
Then Your Action Lists After you review all your day- and time-specific commitments and handle whatever you need to about them, your next most frequent area for review will be the lists of all the actions you could possibly do in your current context.
When you and your spouse are decompressing at the end of the day, and you want to be sure you'll take care of the "business" the two of you manage together about home and family, you'll want to PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO look at your accumulated agendas for him or her.
overload, an intuitive process of The Right Time and Place for the Review reducing things to The Weekly Review is so critical that it behooves you an essential to establish good habits, environments, and tools to relevant and support it.
If you have the luxury of an office or work space that can be somewhat isolated from the people and interactions of the day, and if you have anything resembling a typical Mondayto-Friday workweek, I recommend that you block out two hours early every Friday afternoon for the review.
Three factors make this an ideal time:  The events of the week are likely to be still fresh enough for you to be able to do a complete postmortem ("Oh, yeah, I need to make sure I get back to her about...").
As you increase the speed and agility with which you clear the "runway" and "10,000-foot" levels of your life and work, be sure to revisit the other levels you're engaged in, now and then, to maintain a truly clear head.
* As outlined in chapter 2 (pages 48-53), I have found three priority frameworks to be enormously helpful in the context of deciding actions:  The four-criteria model for choosing actions in the moment  The threefold model for evaluating daily work  The six-level model for reviewing your own work *There are various ways to give it all up.
The Four-Criteria Model for Choosing Actions in the Moment Remember that you make your action choices based on the following four criteria, in order: | | | | Context Time available Energy available Priority Let's examine each of these in the light of how you can best structure your systems and behaviors to take advantage of its dynamics.
Priority Given the context you're in and the time and energy you have, the obvious next criterion for action choice is relative priority: "Out of all my remaining options, what is the most important thing for me to do?"
That process invariably includes an often complex interplay with the goals, values, and directions of your organization and of the other significant people in your life, and with the importance of those relationships to you.
As I explained earlier, during the course of the workday, at any point in time, you'll be engaged in one of three types of activities:  Doing predefined work  Doing work as it shows up  Defining your work You may be doing things on your action lists, doing things as they come up, or processing incoming inputs to determine what work that needs to be done, either then or later, from your lists.
If you're still keeping things in your head, and if get wrapped up in you're still trying to capture only the "critical" stuff on the urgent demands of the moment than your lists, I suggest that the answer is no.
But when you've developed the skill and, habits of processing input rapidly into a rigorously defined system, it becomes CHAPTER 9 I DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES much easier to trust your judgment calls about the dance of what to do, what to stop doing, and what to do instead.
While would be to live you're on hold on the phone, you can be reviewing without your action lists and getting a sense of what you're opportunity, spontaneity, and going to do when the call is done.
And ultimately, in order to know whether you should stop what you're doing and do something else, you'll need to have to have a good sense of what your job requires and how that fits into the other contexts of your life.
The Six-Level Model for Reviewing Your Own Work The six levels of work as we saw in chapter 2 (pages 51-53) may be thought of in terms of altitude:  50,000+feet: Life  40,000 feet: Three- to five-year visions  30,000 feet: One- to two-year goals  20,000 feet: Areas of responsibility  10,000 feet: Current projects  Runway: Current actions It makes sense that each of these levels should enhance and align with the ones above it.
If your job structure CHAPTER 9 | DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES doesn't match up with where you need to be a year from now, you should rethink how you've framed your areas of focus and responsibilities, if you want to get where you're going most efficiently.
The trick is to learn to pay attention to the ones you need to at the appropriate time, to keep you and your systems in balance.
For example, if you spend time prioritizing your work and then later discover that it's not the work you think you ought to be doing, you may have "wasted" time and energy that could have been better spent defin202 CHAPTER 9 1 DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES ing the next job you really want.
The primary reason to work from this bottomup direction is that it clears the psychic decks to begin with, allowing your creative attention to focus on the more meaningful and elusive visions that you may need to challenge yourself to identify.
While the "50,000-foot level" is obviously the most important context within which to set priorities, experience has shown me that when we understand and implement all the levels of work in which we are engaged, especially the runway and 10,000-foot levels, we gain greater freedom and resources to do the bigger work that we're all about.
If you make a complete list of all of the things you want to have happen in your life and work at this level, you'll discover that there are actions you need to do that you hadn't realized.
30,000 to 50,000+ Feet Whereas the three lower levels have mostly to do with the current state of thingsyour actions, projects, and areas of responsibilityfrom here up the factors of the future and your direction and intentions are primary.
You see yourself doing a different kind of job a year from now, and you need to make a transition out of the one you have while exploring the options for a transfer or promotion.
You can have all the other levels of your life and work shipshape, defined, and organized to a T. Still, if you're the slightest bit off course in terms of what at the deepest level you want or are called to be doing, you're going to be uncomfortable.
Perhaps you want to continue accumulating more of this kind of future thinking and would like to do the exercise with more formalityfor example, by drafting a new business plan with your partners, designing and writing out your idea of a dream life with your spouse, creating a more specific career map for the next three years for yourself, or just getting a personal coach who can lead you through those discussions and thought processes.
Or you're stirring the spaghetti sauce in the kitchen and it occurs to you that you might want to give out nice tote bags to participants in the upcoming conference.
If you like to work with a loose-leaf notebook or planner, it's good to keep an inventory of fresh note If you don't have a paper or graph paper that you can use to set up a page good system for on a theme or project as it shows up.
One of the best things about this whole method is that when you really take the responsibility to capture and track what's on your mind, you'll think twice about making commitments internally that you don't really need or want to make.
If you've begun Out of the strain of to complete less-than-two-minute actions as they the doing, into the surface in your life, I'm sure you can attest to the psy- peace of the done.
Not only that, but if you have a boss, what do you think he or THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE she is going to do, after noticing the high levels of competency and productivity you're demonstrating?
That means that as soon as you tell yourself that you should do something, if you file it only in your shortterm memory, there's a part of you that thinks you should be doing it all the time.
And that means that as soon as you've given yourself two things to do, and filed them only in your head, CHAPTER 11 I THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT you've created instant and automatic stress and failure, because you can't do them both at the same time.
I need to trust that any request or relevant inforBailing water in a mation I put on a voice-mail, in an e-mail, in a conleaky boat diverts versation, or in a written note will get into the other energy from rowing person's system and that it will be processed and the boat.
Aside from being an act of politeness intended to avoid interrupting the other's work in progress, the practice actually fosters more warmth and freedom between us, because mechanical things are being CHAPTER 11 | THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT handled in the system instead of tying up our attention in the relationship.
If he gets that next-action thinking done, then, when he happens to have fifteen minutes before a meeting, with a phone at hand, and his energy at about 4.2 out of 10, he can look at the list of options of things to do and be delighted to see "Call tire store CHAPTER 12 | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION for prices" on it.
And do you think there might be a difference THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE in the quality of their lives if they handled this knowledge work on the front end instead of the back?
Which do you think is the more efficient way to move through lifedeciding Avoiding action next actions on your projects as soon as they appear decisions until the on your radar screen and then efficiently grouping pressure of the last them into categories of actions that you get done in minute creates huge certain uniform contexts, or avoiding thinking about inefficiencies and what exactly needs to be done until it has to be done, unnecessary stress.
Real "togetherness" of a group is reflected by the responsibility that all take for defining the real things to do and the specific people assigned to do them, so everyone is freed of the angst of still-undecided actions.
* It's been inspiring for me to learn and coach others how to deal with the immediate realities down where the rubber hits the roadand how to tie in the power of positive imagery to practical experiences in all our daily lives.
The Significance of Applied Outcome Thinking What I want to emphasize now is how learning to process the details of our work and lives with this clear and consistent system *Of course, the people who are most attracted to implementing Getting Things Done are usually already on a self-development track and don't assume that they'll be doing the same thing a year from now that they're doing now, anyway.
Exactly the same results happen actions that address when you hold yourself to the discipline of identify- real quality-oflife issues is ing the real results you want and, more specifically, productivity at the projects you need to define in order to produce its best.
truth is, our energy as human beings seems to have a dualistic and teleological realitywe create and identify with things that aren't real yet on all the levels we experience; and when we do, we recognize how to restructure our current world to morph it into the new one, and experience an impetus to make it so.
If balls are dropped, if decisions about what to do are resisted on the front end, if not all the open loops are managed responsibly, that will be THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE A vision without a task is but a dream, a task without a vision is drudgery, a vision and a task is the hope of the world.
To consistently stay on course, you'll have to do some things CONCLUSION that may not be habits yet: keep everything out of your head; decide actions and outcomes when things first emerge on your radar, instead of later; and regularly review and update the complete inventory of open loops of your life and work.
