The methods I present here are all based on two key objectives:(1) capturing all the things that need to get donenow, later, someday, big, little, or in betweeninto a logical and trusted system outside of your head and off your mind; and (2) disciplining yourself to make front-end decisions about all of me "inputs" you THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE let into your life so that you will always have a plan for "next actions" that you can implement or renegotiate at any moment.
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY Little seems clear for very long anymore, as far as what our work is and what or how much input may be relevant to doing it well.
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY The Real Work of Knowledge Work Welcome to the real-life experience of "knowledge work," and a profound operational principle: You have to think about your stuff more than you realize but not as much as you're afraid you might.
Why Things Are on Your Mind Most often, the reason something is "on your mind" is that you want it to be different than it currently is, and yet:  you haven't clarified exactly what the intended outcome is;  you haven't decided what the very next physical action step is; and/or  you haven't put reminders of the outcome and the action required in a system you trust.
The big difference between what I do and what others do is that I capture and organize 100 percent of my "stuff" in and with objective tools at There is usually an inverse proportion between how much something is on your mind and how much it's getting done.
Most people have been in some version of this mental stress state so consistently, for so long, that they don't even know they're in it.
We (1) collect things that command our attention; (2) process what they mean and what to do about them; and (3) organize the results, which we (4) review as options for what we choose to (5) do.
At other times I may just want to process my notes from a meeting.
I have discovered that one of the major reasons many people haven't had a lot of success with "getting organized" is simply that they have tried to do all five phases at one time.
But if you don't decide what needs to be done about your secretary's birthday, because it's "not that important" right now, that open loop will take up energy and prevent you from having a totally effective, clear focus on what is important.
In order for your mind to let go of the lower-level task of trying to hang on THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE to everything, you have to know that you have truly captured everything that might represent something you have to do, and that at some point in the near future you will process and review all of it.
Many of the things you have to do are being collected for you as you read this.
Most people do have collection devices of some sort, but usually they're more or less out of control.
2 | You must have as few collection buckets as you can get by with.
Minimize the Number of Collection Buckets You should have as many in-baskets as you need and as few as you can get by with.
Emptying the bucket does not mean that you have to finish what's in your voice-mail, e-mail, or in-basket; it just means you have to take it out of the container, decide what it is and what should be done with it, and, if it's still unfinished, organize it into your system.
The in-basket, especially for paper and e-mail, is the best that many people can do in terms of organizationat least they know that somewhere in there is a reminder of something they still have to do.
Instead, you organize the actions you'll need to take based on the decisions you've made about what needs to be done.
But we haven't discussed what stuff is and what to do about it.
and 2 | What's the next action required?
If the action will take longer than two minutes, and you are the right person to do it, you will have to defer acting on it until later and track it on one or more "Next Actions" lists.
To manage actionable things, you will need a list of projects, storage or files for project plans and materials, a calendar, a list of reminders of next actions, and a list of reminders of things you're waiting for.
When I refer to "lists," I just mean some sort of reviewable set of reminders, which could be lists on THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE WORKFLOW DIAGRAMORGANIZING CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW notebook paper or in some computer program or even file folders holding separate pieces of paper for each item.
For instance, the list of current projects could be kept on a page in a Day Runner; it could be a "To Do" category on a PDA; or it could be in a file labeled "Projects List."
They just need to be on a master list so you can review them regularly enough to ensure that appropriate next actions have been defined for each of them.
Support Materials and Reference Files Once you have organized your project support material by theme or topic, you will probably find that it is almost identical to your reference material and could be kept in the same reference file system (a "Wedding" file could be kept in the general-reference files, for instance).
What does need to be tracked is every action that has to happen at a specific time or on a specific day (enter these in your calendar); those that need to be done as soon as they can (add these to your "Next Actions" lists); and all those that you are waiting for others to do (put these on a "Waiting For" list).
Calendar Reminders of actions you need to take fall into two categories: those about things that have to happen on a specific day or time, and those about things that just need to get done as soon as possible.
What to Review When If you set up a personal organization system structured as I recommend, with a "Projects" list, a calendar, "Next Actions" lists, THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE and a "Waiting For" list, not much will be required to maintain that system.
"Projects," "Waiting For," and "Someday/Maybe" lists need to be reviewed only as often as you think they have to be in order to stop you from wondering about them.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE Do The basic purpose of this workflow-management process is to facilitate good choices about what you're doing at any Every decision to point in time.
There will always be a large list of actions that you are not doing at any given moment.
There are four criteria you can apply, in this order: | | | | Context Time available Energy available Priority Context A few actions can be done anywhere (like drafting ideas about a project with pen and paper), but most require a specific location (at home, at your office) or having some productivity tool at hand, such as a phone or a computer.
Should you call the client back, work on the proposal, process your voice-mails and e-mails, or check in with your spouse to see how his or her day is going?
Once you have defined all your work, you can trust that your lists of things to do are complete.
In order to know what your priorities are, you have to know what your work is.
Have you defined all the aspects of the project that could be moved on right now, what the next action is for each part, and who's responsible for what?
But they still have very little to do with what people are doing or what they're inspired about.
How do you want or need to work with others on this project to ensure its success?
It can be CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING quite a challenge, however, to identify with images of You often need to success if they represent new and foreign territory make it up in your that is, if you have few reference points about what mind before you an event might actually look like and little experience can make it happen in your life.
What if there's still more planning to be done before you can feel comfortable with what's next?
In a group-planning situation, it isn't necessary for everyone to know what the next step is on every part of the project.
Most projects, given my definition of a project as an outcome requiring more than one action, need no more than a listing of their outcome and next action for you to get If the project is still them off your mind.
You planning to do.
You'll still be doing the full planning model on all of them, but only in your head, and just enough to figure out next actions and keep them going until they're complete.
If there's CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING a lack of clarity at the planning level, there's probably a need for more brainstorming to generate a sufficient inventory of ideas to create trust in the plan.
As you'll discover through this process, it's critical that you have at least a satellite home PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO You must have a focused work space at home, at work, and if possible even in system identical to the one in your office.
But you'll still need a want to use your "home base" with a well-grooved set of tools and sufficient space for all the reference and support systems, not just think about them.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Calendar Although you may not need a calendar just to collect your incomplete items, you'll certainly come up with actions that need to be put there, too.
How do you want to see your reminders of actions, agendas, and projects?
Where and how often might you need to review them?
When considering whether to get and use an organizer, and if so, which one, keep in mind that all you really need to do is manage lists.
You've got to be able to create a list on the run and review it easily and as regularly as you need to.
If you have to get up every time you have some ad hoc piece of paper you want to file, you'll tend to stack it instead of filing it, and you're also likely to just resist the whole in-basket process (because you subconsciously know there's stuff in there that might need filing!).
There are very practical reasons to gather everything before you start processing it: 1 | it's helpful to have a sense of the volume of stuff you have to deal with; 2 | it lets you know where the "end of the tunnel" is; and 3 | when you're processing and organizing, you don't want to be distracted psychologically by an amorphous mass of stuff that might still be "somewhere."
Keep in mind, you can feel good about what you're not doing, only when you know what you're not doing.
They all go into "in," so they'll be available for later processing.
In other words, supplies, reference materials, decoration, and equipment may need to be tossed into the in-basket if they're not just where they should be, the way they should be.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Issues About Collecting As you engage in the collecting phase, you may run into one or more of the following:  you've got a lot more than will fit into one in-basket;  you're likely to get derailed into purging and organizing;  you may have some form of stuff already collected and organized; and/or  you're likely to run across some critical things that you want to keep in front of you.
You'll be able to decide about it later, when you process the in-basket.
You may already have some lists and some sort of organization system in place.
If there is, put it into "in" so you can deal with it later in the process.
If there are actionable items, you know what to do: make a note and put it in "in."
You will likely not keep these pieces of paper (unless you decide that low-tech is your best organizing method), but it'll be handy to have them as discrete items to deal with as you're processing.
It should also include any items PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO on your organizer lists for which you have not yet determined next actions.
I recommend that you read through this chapter and the next one, on organizing your actions, before you actually start processing what you've collected in "in."
The first thing we have to do (after we've collected the in-basket) is make sure all their hardware and software are working.
Emergency Scanning Is Not Processing Most people get to their in-basket or their e-mail and look for the most urgent, most fun, or most interesting stuff to deal with first.
Processing all the things in your world will make you more conscious of what you are going to do and what you should not be doing.
Put them on your calendar or in a "tickler" file.
If there's something that needs to be done about the item in "in," then you need to decide what exactly that next action is.
Many people think they've determined the "next action" when they get it down to "set meeting."
Well, it could be with a phone physical action is, call or an e-mail, but to whom?
Once You Decide What the Action Step is You have three options once you decide what the next action really is.
Do It If the next action can be done in two minutes or less, do it when you first pick the item up.
Many people are amazed by how many two-minute actions are possible, often on some of their most critical current projects.
probably have You need to make a list of projects.
In this chapter I'll lead you through the organizing steps and tools that will be required as you process your in-basket.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS WORKFLOW DIAGRAMORGANIZING PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO The Basic Categories There are seven primary types of things that you'll want to keep track of and manage from an organizational perspective:  A "Projects" list  Project support material  Calendared actions and information  "Next Actions" lists  A "Waiting For" list  Reference material  A "Someday/Maybe" list The Importance of Hard Edges It's critical that all of these categories be kept pristinely distinct from one another.
If you have a project that you're not going to be doing anything about for some time, it must go onto your "Someday/Maybe" list so you can relate to the "Projects" list with the rigorous action-generating focus it needs.
All You Really Need Is Lists and Folders Once you know what you need to keep track of (covered in the previous chapter, on Processing), all you really need is lists and CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS folders for reference and support materials.
Folders (digital or paper-based) but I would give my life for the will be required to hold your reference material and simplicity on the the support information for active projects.
A list could look like one of three things: (1) a file folder with separate paper notes for the items within the category; (2) an actual list on a titled piece of paper (often within a loose-leaf organizer or planner); or (3) an inventory in a software program or on a digital assistant, such as Microsoft Outlook task categories or a category on a handheld PDA.
You'll want to sort all of this into groupings that make sense to you so you can review them as options for work to do when you have time.
The Actions That Go on Your Calendar For the purposes of organization, as I've said, there are two basic kinds of actions: those that must be done on a certain day and/or at a particular time, and those that just need to be done as soon as you can get to them, around your other calendared items.
What many people want to do, however, based CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS on old habits of writing daily to-do lists, is put actions on the calendar that they think they'd really like to get done next Monday, say, but that then actually might not, and that might then have to be taken over to following days.
Organizing As-Soon-As-Possible Actions by Context Over many years I have discovered that the best way to be reminded of an "as soon as I can" action is by the particular context required for that actionthat is, either the tool or the location or the person needed to complete it.
How discrete these categories will need to be will depend on (1) how many actions you actually have to track; and (2) how often you change the contexts within which to do them.
The Most Common Categories of Action Reminders You'll probably find that at least a few of the following common list headings for next actions will make sense for you:  "Calls"  "At Computer" "Errand's"  "Office Actions" or "At Office" (miscellaneous)  "At Home"  "Agendas" (for people and meetings)  "Read/Review" "Calls" This is the list of all the phone calls you need to make; you can work off it as long as you have a phone available.
"Office Actions'/"At Office" If you work in an office, there will be certain things that you can do only there, and a list of those will be a useful thing to have in front of you thenthough obviously, if you have a phone and a computer in your office, and you have "Calls" and "At Computer" as separate lists, they'll be in play as well.
I'm sure you've got numerous personal and around-the-house projects, and often the CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS next thing to do on them is just to do them.
And you must make an lists.
When the next action on something is up to someone else, you don't need an action reminder, just a trigger about what you're waiting for from whom.
If the next action on a service order is to make a call, it should be in a "Calls" group; if the action step is to review information and input it into the computer, it should be labeled "At Computer."
supply the reminders you need to see when you need to see them, so you can trust your choices about what you're doing (and what you're not doing).
If you haven't done so already, I recommend that initially you make a "Projects" list in a very simple format, similar to the ones you've used for your lists of actions: it can be a category in a digital organizer, a page in a loose-leaf planner, or even a single file folder labeled "PROJECTS," with either a master list or separate sheets of paper for each one.
While you could, of course, put them on your "Waiting For" list, it might make better sense to create a "ProjectsDelegated" list to track CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS them: your task will be simply to review the list regularly enough to ensure that everything on it is moving along appropriately.
But I find it helpful to see them all organized on one list, in the order in which they are coming up on my calendar, apart from my other projects.
If you make the large project your one listing on your "Projects" list, you'll want to keep a list of the subprojects and/or the project plan itself as "project support material" to be reviewed when you come to that major item.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS Project Support Materials Project support materials are not project actions, and they're not project reminders.
Having good, consistent structures with which to manage the nonactionable items in our work and lives is as important as managing our action and project reminders.
The only time you should have attention on your reference material is when you need to change your system in some way because you have too much or too little information, given your needs or preferences.
The problem most people have psychologically with all their stuff is that it's still "stuff"that is, they haven't decided what's PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO actionable and what's not.
Relative to your personal organization and productivity, this is not a core issue, If material is purely so long as all of your projects and actions are in a for reference, the control system that you work with regularly.
Once you've done that, you have total freedom to manage and organize as much or as little reference material as you want.
They may be review, all of which will work to get them off your some of the most current radar and your mind.
Usually much of that stuff needs to be tossed, some of it needs to go into "Read/Review," some needs to be filed as reference, some belongs on the calendar or in a tickler file (see page 173) for review in a month or perhaps at the beginning of the next quarter, and some actually has next actions on it.
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS This is a big topic to devote so little space to, I know, but go ahead and ask yourself, "Is there any major decision for which I should create a future trigger, so I can feel comfortable just 'hanging out' with it for now?"
First, Clarify Inherent Projects and Actions For much of this kind of "stuff," there is still a project and/or an action that needs to be defined.
If in fact you have now collected everything that represents an open loop in your life and work, processed each one of those items in \ PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO terms of what it means to you and what actions are required, and organized the results into a complete system that holds a current and complete overviewlarge and smallof all your present and "someday" projects, then you're ready for the next phase of implementation in the art of stress-free productivitythe review process.
You must be assured that you're doing what you need to be doing, and that it's OK to be not doing what you're not doing.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO A real review process will lead to enhanced and proactive new thinking in key areas of your life and work.
This is really just common sense, but few people actually have their processes and their organization honed to the point where they are as functional as they could be.
When you're about to go in for a discussion with your boss or your partner, take a moment to review the outstanding agendas you have with him or her, so you'll know that you're using your time most effectively.
My answer is simply, you need for review, "As much time as I need to to feel comfortable about as long as you're what I'm doing."
What most things at the right people don't realize is that my lists are in one sense time.
Then Your Action Lists After you review all your day- and time-specific commitments and handle whatever you need to about them, your next most frequent area for review will be the lists of all the actions you could possibly do in your current context.
The Right Review in the Right Context You may need to access any one of your lists at any time.
Put it all into your in-basket for processing.
Review Any Relevant Checklists Is there anything you haven't done that you need to do?
If you have a bunch of things to do on one to-do list, but you actually can't do many of them in the same context, you force yourself to continually keep reconsidering all of them.
All of my action lists are set up this way, so I have to decide on the very next physical action before I can know which list to put an item on (is this something that requires the computer?
"How do I decide my priorities?"
As I explained earlier, during the course of the workday, at any point in time, you'll be engaged in one of three types of activities:  Doing predefined work  Doing work as it shows up  Defining your work You may be doing things on your action lists, doing things as they come up, or processing incoming inputs to determine what work that needs to be done, either then or later, from your lists.
While would be to live you're on hold on the phone, you can be reviewing without your action lists and getting a sense of what you're opportunity, spontaneity, and going to do when the call is done.
You can be processing e-mails while you're on hold PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO Do ad hoc work as it shows up, not because it is the path of least resistance, but because it is the thing you need to do, vis-a-vis all the rest.
And ultimately, in order to know whether you should stop what you're doing and do something else, you'll need to have to have a good sense of what your job requires and how that fits into the other contexts of your life.
On each of those projects you'll have things you need to do, as soon as you can do them (next actions).
What key things would priorities at any you need to put in place and make happen right now, level.
For example, if you spend time prioritizing your work and then later discover that it's not the work you think you ought to be doing, you may have "wasted" time and energy that could have been better spent defin202 CHAPTER 9 1 DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES ing the next job you really want.
If you make a complete list of all of the things you want to have happen in your life and work at this level, you'll discover that there are actions you need to do that you hadn't realized.
The operational purpose of the "Areas of Focus" list is to ensure that you have all your projects and next actions defined, so you can manage your responsibilities appropriately.
Even so, there are probably some things you can identify right now that can help you get current in your own thinking about your work and what's important in it.
Or "What new things are my children going to be doing next year, and what do I need to do differently because of that?"
If so, put that outcome on your "Projects" list, and decide the next action.
Most of the people who need those already have them, or at least have access to the training and software required to learn about them.
planning.
Most of the outcomes you have identified for your "Projects" list will not need any kind of front-end planning, other than the sort you do in your head, quickly and naturally, to come up with a next action on them.
For these you'll need a more specific application of one or more of the other four phases of the natural planning model: purpose and principles, vision/outcome, brainstorming, and/or organizing.
Projects That Need Next Actions About Planning There are probably a few projects you can think of right now, off the top of your head, that you know you want to get more objectified, fleshed out, and under control.
If you haven't done it already, get a next action now that will start the planning process for each of these, and put it on the appropriate action list.
Brainstorming Some of the projects that have your attention right now will require you to do your own free-form thinking; this is especially true of those for which you were not clear about what PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO the next action would be when you made that decision.
Organizing You may have some projects for which you have already collected notes and miscellaneous support materials, and you just need to sort through them and get them into a more structured form.
If you have to be in your office to do that (because that's where the files are, and you don't want to carry them around), that action should go on your "At Office" action list.
Create File Folders or Loose-Leaf Pages as Needed A good general-reference filing system, right at hand and easy to use, is not only critical to manage the general workflow process, but highly functional for project thinking as well.
And most of your projects may need only a page or two to hold the few ideas you need to track.
Just as your "Next Actions" lists need to be up-to-date, so, too, does your "Projects" list.
You'll then most attention on or interest in right now and do be way ahead of some thinking and collecting and organizing on most people.
That means that as soon as you tell yourself that you should do something, if you file it only in your shortterm memory, there's a part of you that thinks you should be doing it all the time.
as next action?"
for yourself and those and focus.
If you haven't known for sure whether you needed to make a call, send an e-mail, look up something, or buy an item at the store as the very next thing to move on, it hasn't been getting done.
"So what's the next action?"
That's about how much time is required to decide what the "doing" would look like on almost everything.
It's just the few seconds of focused thinking that most people have not yet done about most of their stuff.
People in my seminars often have things on their lists like "Get a tune-up for the car."
Is "Get a tune-up" a next action?
"So, what's the next action?"
Most people have many things just like that on their lists.
Do very next action to take on every one of them.
So when do you think most people really make a lot of their next-action decisions about their stuff-when it shows up, or when it blows up?
And do you think there might be a difference THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE in the quality of their lives if they handled this knowledge work on the front end instead of the back?
But without a clear conclusion that there is a next action, much less what it is CHAPTER 12 | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION or who's got it, more often than not a lot of "stuff" gets left up in the air.
"Do we really know what we're doing here?"
If you're not sure what I'm talking about, I suggest that in your next meeting with anyone, you end the conversation with the question, "So what's the next action here?"
The Significance of Applied Outcome Thinking What I want to emphasize now is how learning to process the details of our work and lives with this clear and consistent system *Of course, the people who are most attracted to implementing Getting Things Done are usually already on a self-development track and don't assume that they'll be doing the same thing a year from now that they're doing now, anyway.
success to another, ("What's the next action?").
CHAPTER 13 I THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING I'm in the focus business.
It all just affirms that the way our minds naturally work is the way that we should focus to make anything happen in the physical world.
Get in-baskets.
Gather everything into your system, and work through the Getting Things Done process.
